# Scott's Tale



https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/BL/0000098/18940406/005/0001

Pall Mall Gazette - Friday 06 April 1894

THE TRUTH OUT AT LAST. BY SCOTT (the Missing Man).

How and Why I went to Ardlamont, the Story of the Boat Incident, the Death of Mr. Hambrough, and my subsequent Disappearance and Adventures when charged with Murder. By EDWARD SWEENEY (the Missing Man himself).

PREFACE.

IN publishing this, the true account of the Great Ardlamont Mystery which for a period of four months occupied the attention of almost every man, woman, and child in the United Kingdom, I make but one apology-namely, to the British public for the delay in putting before them the facts within my own knowledge of that most unhappy and unfortunate occurrence which should (had not the Scotch law authorities by their action in charging me with an atrocious crime, without one particle of evidence to justify them in doing so) have been published long since.

I make no claim to literary powvers, but will do my best to show by my statement how by one mistake (I mean my harmless adoption of a name other than that by which I was commonly known on the turf for reasons which I will explain) I woke up to find myself involved in a mystery, charged with murder, hunted like a dog with a price upon my head, declared an outlaw, and doomed to suffer more than by my poor ability I can ever hope to make my readers appreciate. Now for my story.  
*London, April, 1894.* EDWARD SWEENEY.

CHAPTER 1.

*My acquaintance with Mr. Monson—I am invited to Scotland—Why 1 took the name of Scott—I arrive at Ardlamont on August 8, 1893.*

Those of my readers who arc acquainted with the peculiarly free and easy manners of gentlemen who profess a passion for horse-racing, and the ever-ready and broadcast way in which they dispense their hospitality to those whose acquaintance they make while following the pastime of racing, will understand that there is nothing strange, or in fact peculiar, in an invitation being given by a gentleman of position and means to a bookmaker to visit him at his sporting residence and enjoy with him a few days' holiday and recreation; and such was the nature of the pressing and kindly invitation received by me, Edward Davis, the bookmaker, from Mr. Alfred Monson, my client and patron, in the summer of 1833.

My acquaintance with Mr. Monson was of no great standing, having commenced some time about the month of May in that year, when he was introduced to me quite casually as a young swell with plenty of money and a great liking for horse-racing and betting, and therefore a most desirable gentleman for me to cultivate and do business with, and, to be perfectly frank, as I shall endeavour to be throughout my story, one from whom I desired and hoped to benefit considerably, and I must say that those few transactions on the turf which I have had with him have been to my own, and, I trust, our mutual satisfaction.

As I have said, it was in or about the month of May when I first met Mr. Monson, and between that time and August I saw him, perhaps, half a dozen times.

At the latter end of July I was in London, and accidentally met my racing friend, with whom I had some conversation on the usual topic, and it was at this meeting he informed me with evident pride and pleasure that he was about to enter into possession of what I understood to be his new sporting estate in Scotland.

Here let me at once state that at this time I did not know of the existence of Mr. Hambrough, and had never seen or heard of that young gentleman. I mention this to correct an error which is prevalent, to the effect that Hambrough was known to me; but such is not the case. Mr. Monson was my client and patron, and was, I thought what is termed a "swell," for as such he passed and acted.

At that meeting in London, some time during the latter part of July, Mr. Monson invited me to come to visit him at Ardlamont, and his invitation and the promised welcome were so kindly insisted upon that it was out of the question to refuse.

I accepted the offer, and it was arranged that I should set out for Scotland about the 7th or 8th of August, when Mr. Monson hoped to be in Glasgow, where we could meet and journey on to Ardlamont together.

THE JOURNEY TO ARDLAMONT

True to my promise and according to arrangement, I arrived in Scotland on the 7th August, and left Greenock with my host on the steamer which sailed from Greenock on August 8 about four o'clock in the afternoon, and, as if indicative of the trouble which was to follow that ill-omened journey, I remembered how intensely disagreeable was the terrible amount of soot and dirt which constantly fell upom me from the smoking funnels.

On board the steamer I was introduced by Mr. Monson, who, if my recollection serves me, did not give my right name, to a gentleman of the name of Donald, at whose invitation I went below to taste the Scotch whisky so strongly recommended  by him as an antidote for the soot and smoke from which we were all suffering.

While sampling Mr. Donald's prescription the steamer came alongside a pier, which I understood was our destination; so tumbling up on deck I sought out and collected my luggage, and thinking my host had gone ashore ahead of me, left the steamer by the gangway. But on my arrival on the pier I could not see Mr. Monson, and then I learned on inquiry that that I had made a mistake in getting off at Tighnaibruaich, instead of waiting until the steamer arrived at the next pier, the proper one for Kames, our destination. On realizing my mistake, or, more properly speaking, the error of Mr. Monson, in saying to me "Here we are," before he had assured himself of the name of the pier the steamer was alongside, and upon ascertaining the distance between Tighnaibruaich and Kames to be only about one mile, I immediately hired a trap to drive me to the latter; and whilst being so driven by the lad McPhee, the boots of the Tighnaibruaich Hotel, we met Mr. Monson, coming to look for me in his dogcart, which had evidently been waiting to meet him on the arrival of the steamer at Kames.

Mr. Monson was pleasant as usual over my mistake, and directed his coachman to put my luggage in the dogcart. I took my seat by his side, and off we drove to Ardlamont.

During the drive from the steamer to the house Mr. Monson mentioned the difficulty he felt in introducing me as Mr. Davis, the bookmaker, to his wife and any other ladies or guests who might come to Ardlamont, apologizing at the same time for having called me out of my name to Mr. Donald, and the occurrence was, as near as I can recollect, discussed in such a way as this:—

Mr. Monson: Look here, old fellow, it will never do for me to introduce you to my wife as Ted Davis the bookmaker, so you mustn't mind if I say you are something else, for I feel sure she would make a fuss about it. Not that she herself would care; but you know some people are funny about the turf, and think any one connected with it must be a wrong 'un.

I replied: I quite understand what you mean, and you may say whatever you like, so long as I know what to say myself.

Mr Monson: Well I thought you wouldnlt ming; but my wife would know at once if she heard the name Ted Davis who you were, so you must not let her know.

"CALL ME JUGGINS."

I replied: It don't matter a jot to me what you call me, so long as you don't make a fool of me. You can call me Juggins or Muggins if you like, but it is no use my trying to be a toff, you know, and it's no use my saying I am a sport, for though I know as much about racing as most men that's about  all I know of sport. Can't you say I've come up on business and you have asked me to stay?"

Mr. Monson: I know, old chap. I will introduce you as the engineer come to look at the engines of the yacht for me, and that will be all right if you don't mind.

I replied: Do as you like, but if they get me on about the engineering you mustn't blame me if I give you away.

Mr. Monson: Oh, that'll be all right, old chap; we won't talk any shop, so let's remember you are, say, Mr. Edward Scott, the engineer, about the engines of the yacht, the *Alert*, which I am just going to have fitted.

After this conversation I must confess I did feel a little relieved, for I myself felt a little bit out of place going up to Scotland for the 12th August, presumably for the shooting, without any gun or anything of the sort, and I had more than once thought over my position if I should be asked to join in any shooting party, for it is a fact that I am absolutely ignorant of the art of shooting, never having possessed a gun or shot one off in my life, and at the same time I will confess that I am no athlete, and can neither shoot, fish, row, nor swim—four very useful and general accomplishments which I have never acquired—a fact which, under the circumstances that occurred rather stamps me as a round peg for a square hole in connection with my supposed part in the subsequent events. Anyway, here I was with the prospects of a real good time before me, ready to enjoy myself with a jolly good fellow for a host, who, without any hint from me to do so, had removed all obstacles which might have prevented my complete enjoyment of the visit.

I BECAME MR. SCOTT.

I gladly became Mr. Scott for the time. I felt relieved; our conversation turned once more to pleasant subjects. On we trundled through the country as happy and jolly as we could be, little dreaming of what was going to happen within the next forty-eight hours, and what that very relief I then felt would cost me.

And now let me, before I leave this part of the story, ask you, my readers, to put from your minds all that happened subsequently to that night, and take a fair, unbiased view of the situation under which I adopted the name of Scott, and say if, under the circumstances, is in any way suspicious of an evil intention.

Mr. Monson had in a moment of good fellowship invited me to stay with him as his guest, and he suddenly realized that it would not be pleasant to have it known his visitor was Ted Davis the bookmaker, for obvious reasons. Ted Davis the engineer would not do, for the name Ted Davis was known to his wife; and therefore the suggestion that I should adopt the name of Ted Scott and pass as the engineer to account for my presence and my want of sporting equipment for the shooting.

I ought to mention, as it might be said why not Ted Sweeney, that Mr. Monson had no idea my real name  was not Davis, which is the name by which I have always been known on the turf, and therefore it would have been as strange for him to call me Sweeney as Scott, and I preferred the latter name myself when he suggested it; and I believe it is the custom of many people, from Royalty down to humbler individuals, to pass incognito when courted pleasure renders it necessary that their identity should not be discovered for various reasons, and therefore I say I did nothing wrong, and nothing even that should tell against me, when I fell in with the above suggestion.

IN ARDLAMONT HOUSE.

Having arrived at Ardlamont House and been introduced to Mrs. Monson, who received me most cordially, we proceeded to the dining-room, where a very welcome and nice dinner awaited us. The party at dinner consisted of Mr. Monson and his wife, the governess (Miss Heron), and myself. Mr. Hambrough did not appear at dinner, and though I understood he was staying in the house, I had at this time never seen him, and did not know but what he was a guest similar to myself, and it never crossed my mind that he was the real owner and Monson was his tutor. I do not suggest that Mr. Monson deceived me as to this, or that I was wilfully misled; but I suppose, having been introduced to him as a swell with lots of money, I assumed all I saw and envied was part of his good fortune. I subsequently ascertained that Mr. Hambrough was away fishing that evening, and did not return until very late at night—past midnight.

All went very pleasantly at dinner. Mrs. Monson was a charming hostess, and made me feel quite at home; and informed me amongst other things she hoped I could stay for the shooting, and as an indudement stated she had engaged a new cook for the shooting season for the benefit of the gentlemen who would be at Ardlamont.

After dinner Mr. Monson and I adjourned to the smoking room, and there again I was struck by the completeness of things and the very comfortable way in which he lived. The dinner had been excellent, and the whisky was very fine, I remember, tempting me to take several glasses, and once more to thank my good fortune in having encountered my new friend.

On being shown to my bedroom I fancied it was a little cold, and therefore I asked to have a good fire made to warm it, as I was, after my journey, feeling a little bit chilly, and feared an attack of asthma (to which complaint I am very subject) if I caught cold.

My room having been beautifully warmed, after a parting glass and cigar with Mr. Monson, I retired to rest on the night of the 8th of August, 1893, without a thought of anything but my own good luck in being a vistor at Ardlamont House, the guest of such a delightful host and hostess as Mr. and Mrs. Monson.

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/BL/0000098/18940407/005/0001?browse=true
Pall Mall Gazette - Saturday 07 April 1894

THE TRUTH OUT AT LAST.

BY SCOTT (THE MISSING MAN).

HOW AND WHY I WENT TO ARDLAMONT, THE STORY OF THE BOAT INCIDENT, THE DEATH OF MR. HAMBROUGH, AND MY SUBSEQUENT DISAPPEARANCE AND ADVENTURES WHEN CHARGED WITH MURDER. BY EDWARD SWEENEY (THE MISSING MAN HIMSELF).

CHAPTER II.

*The Morning of the 9th August, 1893 — My Introduction to Mr. Cecil  Hambrough — The Story of the Boat Incident on the Night of the 9th August, 1893.*

The stirring sounds of a gong awoke me on the morning of August 9, and I hastened to the breakfast-room, where I found already assembled Mr. and Mrs. Monson and the governess with their three little children, two little girls and a little boy, most intelligent and pretty youngsters. Besides the above-mentioned, there was also at the table a tall, fair young gentleman, to whom Mr. Monson introduced me as "Mr. Scott—Mr. Hambrough." This was Mr. Cecil Hambrough, whom I took to be a friend or guest.

I took a seat opposite to Mr. Hambrough, and from the conversation at the breakfast-table nothing passed to intimate to me that the position of the parties assembled was other than I had fancied.

I was struck with the appearance of Mr. Hambrough, who certainly was an exceptionally nice young fellow, bright but unassuming, and seemingly perfectly happy and contented with his lot in life.

The conversation was chiefly about the prospects of shooting and fishing, and reference was made to the late hour at which Mr. Hambrough had returned the previous night from his sport. He seemed to be an enthusiastic fisherman, and only laughed at the allusions to late hours and wet clothes, &c.; and while admiring the manly, sportsmanslike nature of this fine young fellow, I could not help feeling that his idea of enjoyment and my own were somewhat different, at the same time making a mental note for myself that mucking about with sopping wet nets, up to one's knees in water, till past midnight would not suit my book, or be conducive to my good health.

I made an allusion to my objections and remember trying to cover any suspicion of fear by the usual remark suggesting how delighted I 

TO DO

should be if the confounded asthma did not prevent my going in for such fun, at which Mr. Hambrough laughed in his quiet gentlemanly way. I say I was struck by this fine young fellow, and instinctively liked him, and although I am a bookmaker, anii~ frankly confess that as sueh I should not have licsitatcd to have donle a g~ ud strokce olf hts~iiess with him, perhaps to my own ad~vantage and his lo. , Iy bleod fa irly boil-, when I remember how I read in the,, daily papers of' tie sugsino h Solicitor-Gencral for >cotiatitt that I at thiti time was there for the express~ purpiose of joiling~p inl a conl- spiracy to take thk, young man's, li e. Great God I what sort of a desperate villain have I bcen reckonled toh Ic aiut introduced to as tine a yoting gentlemian as I yevl r aw, ill the morning, with whom 1 have h a d no quarrcl, Vrho1 ?? mue nough1t, anid fromi whomi I cxi ted nothing, hut that veryni for sonmc unexplained reason (othcr than, I a)uppo.t-C, thle .snggcE~tio~i that I should s~hare in) somne inoiney wh~ich others miloP ht rccctvc at his, death) deliberately connive at, andl a ~list in at ?? andl diabolical attenipt to drown him while I Statid onl the shore andi hear his cries. But that is not all1. The attempt to take lrii-t life thiat Ini-lt having failed, or rather one of the 111-1Uvde-e having'~ repented ol the act (for such musst have been Mir. M1onson's rcasnun for hi itigi., his friend out of the water, where it suggested hie dclib( rately put him), I again shake himi by the hland, auid vait until the or xt mon tiipn when 1 assist to take himt Out to mleet his (dcoili and hec sho' bate at dog before mly own eyes. That was the preposterous story of the prosecutlion, awl that was-- the story which all that talent admnycud do0 ;ought to 'tliudte the jury to believe, but N~lhich thle judgeC ef-tedC~ ti1 allow, anld the jury refused to swallow. 1 utnt hwvr igress fr inm my story. I am not on miy defenceI(, and I hopeI) Ily ladea-t Will e'tcu-nc rue for the little outburst above. PREPARING TiHr BOAT. After breakfast Mir. Mronson intimated his iotention of` golnig forc a bathle, anid asked mie to ac(-oinpany hJim, which I did, hait reastved to bathe. A\ I have already said, I sailter naion frli a ithla'~, afdt-;il cint swiml, ba) "thinig in the open sea is not ninelih Of a luxory to tinc. W\list wvalking, with Mr. Monson we met the ageiit, who I afterwxards, leariit was Mr. St~-phle, aend he and the former had somne conversatioii about the boat, wil it 'va:a sug- gested was not big enough f'ur the fisltitig ~11ir. Ilianiiiri tih airiidiie.( ill, and therefore it was arran-ed to go round aid g'1t tiolier fare-er i \Ve consequently walked rouiid to the place wahere the loagr et vi and got into it, to bring it rouiid to the same spot xxhlire thle Other onie wa-s lying onl the beach, and Mr. M;Aonson ask~ed tinc to take ani dr ani !tellp him: pull her round. I did take aiil oar, and( s-ucceededl iii catchtig fra crabs, and in generally making an exhibition of nivsell and doing as ?? as I could to capsize her iii the swell from the paddle steamners. We did, however, eventually mnanage to get the boat round to the(, Spot required, anid Mr. Monson seemied relieved to be lshunit oflis cr~ew. TIhteaitt to carry downithie nets and lpuit them iinthieboat frti)r~-. 1ionitrag't)~. I1 There was a tremendous lot of net, I thought, and they were all piled into the smaller boat, according to Mr. Hambrough's \visi. Ilii tatt, the 1 oat ?? dI all net1 and 1Ididn't quite see wh~ere tile fishermnci were goin1g, to sit or pull. At dinner in the evening tile proposed fishing expedlition that ?? was discussed. Mr. Hambrough pressud me to collie with them, and seemed to enjoy in his quiet way my various excuses for not sti ing ilii fune in the same light as himself; but I promised to come down and give them a shove off. We had a very nice and pleasant dinner, and it must have been half-past nine or ten o'clock when we rose fronm thle table and xalkttl ttown ti the boats, which were somne five hundred yards or so from the li onus. On arrival at the boats Mr. Hambrough and Mr. Monson both again rirhd to persuade me to go along with them, but I firmly stuck to my resolve not to go, making all sorts of excuses-that I had no fishing cit liths, and was feeling seedy, &c., anything ; but the real train was being, out ain1ollit a lot of soaking wet nets, Iin a small open boat, Onl a pitch (etin night, fishing off the coast of Scotland, vva not inl mly Into0. I can (to my bit as well as any nuau at Epsom or Sandown, wvlere I amn ?? I nowil as a great sportsman, but to stand in the reain with a in. ekintosl i e is One thing ; to get wet throtigh and sit in a beat in the dark wvithi die cettae(,-t fa good ducking for your trouible is another antid I had had etioti ?? pulling in the morning. Time: ACCIDENT.

I gave them a shove-off, and away they went to nirtloy ttte'a l ef-~, jolly as could be, laughing at mny timidity, Leaving me, standing on the beach, enjoying myself in my way, smoking a cigar. The night was pitch dark, and they were soon lo- t to mny view its they rowed seawards but they could not have cone inuch incre thita a few. hundred yards or so when I heard a shout ti-om the seca to the ri glit of where the boat left thle beach. 1 could see nouthing, bttt liolluad back, " Hullo!" Now let me make no mistake-or rather do not myv reaithrs inisimnhcr- stand me the shout I heard was not a cry for help, or anything like it, bat was a shoot of surprise, such as a manl would utter if the unexpected thing had happened. The next thing I saw-and it all took place in a very few' mliInLt-~S xv-as Mr. Mlonson come rtniniiig tip, wvet through, to the other boat,v.ie I wa.s standinig. I said What's up ? " and hie r eplied, as far as I canl retnenub er, That damned boat's capsized, and shot ?? ?? dl thellisti into the wvater ! I ere give us a hand, and htelp) shove eil the boat I moat go aiid fetch him in." He got hold of the boat, and looked to -,ee it diet Plug was in the bottom, but it was so dark he cuold not find it, and said, to me, "You run up to the house, like a good chap, and get a fight of solme -art, and look slippery about it anything will do, but I uanlt ?? limiyation, it's; so dark." All this took place in less time ilian it takes to write, aiid dlurilL the whole of the time Mr. hIamnbrough, kept calling out to Monson to let him know his wvhcreabouts. Mr. Hambrough did not give one cry for help, or anything like it, but, on the contrary, seemed to be perfectly happy wherever he was; which I could not have been very many yards away by the sound of his voice, Mr. Monson was in a hurry to get the boat off;, beat did not soheni frightened or flustered, and they kept up the " Coo-_ ey' to one aimother, with an odd laugh in between. I believe I was the only one of the three who was at all frighltened or alarmed, and I ran o-ill to the house as fast as I could go and got a light. Thie light I got was a great, big, heavy dining-roomn lamp the ground was rocky, tind I lictd to Slowebx with it, althoughl I lost no time. WVhen I arrivcd back, carrying the lamiip, Mr. Monson had got the boat off, been out and fetched Mr. Hamnbrough, and dhesy were both standiig on the beach roaring with laughter at ine carrying, the ?? tiiit be iing,~ so scared. 'I DIDNxi Sti 'I If:- ?? As far as MrF. I la nihroughi amd Mr I. MIoiison were ccut ceri ied, theiy ?? treated the whole thing as a capital joke anld (lid 1iiti litg hut lak~e thul of me and the lamip, and I coil tell you, mly readers, I didn't see the joke. They kept me humbugging about for quite half an hour holding" the ltmiip (ai.d l tell you it weighed something after I had held it upII for that time, for I C-Oulldn~t set it downi oin the bench) till I had had about enough of it, anld bean to feel xver pieased with myself and mysh fisthimig excnin ?? they still seemed to ciiioy immensely, buat wvhichi I thought un catlih A\fter thcy hakd got thle boats made fast--for they tiaed both ot the olu 1 the beach -we walked up to the house, and they bothl had soiiie hot whisky-and-water and I remember I was so thirsty running about with the lamp that I had a good ?? of beer. That is the story of the boat incident, of which so mnuch has been made and said, and which h rscl tion tried to prove was an attempt to initi cr-. My readers will say, Why wvs I not at the trial to tell the tirv this ? bot do not forget I never had tht chance give itile. 1 a vo ke otlre muorning, -CLEANING' SILVER.-Alt dific~ulty in keeping silver, clecirti-plate, &c., ,intarnished and with a briliiani volish. may be obviates by uiling GODDAMYir NoN-.INIEXCCRIAL PLAYE PO\%oDER. bold qverywhie'C in boxes, Ii., 2s. 6d., and 4s. 6d. Six Gold Medals awvaxted I to find my self charged with murder, and had I gone to Scotland I should have beeu popped straight into a ccil, and without a chance to speak; have been put in the dock, where my mouth would have been closed, and where I Could not speak of what I sav and knew, but should have had to stan(l and listen to other people who knew nothinilg whatever abouit the occurrence deliberately giving all sorts of' versions and opinions of' whiat they knew notiing about, withl thei manly and charitable intention of ?? IC of murder innocent or not, no matter ; for such appears to nic to be the privilege of' a Solicitor-General in Scotland when con- ducting a prosecutioll or the Crown. I am sincerely sorry if by my al0sencc Mr. MeiisonI soSfared, bltt I say I was well advised that I could do him no good by standinlg by his side. I had accepted olle invitation to bonny Scotlanid, and I wasn't in a hiuiri to accept a second, although the Procurator-1 iscal kindly ?? to p~la ?? ?? utp and promised me a hearty welcome, but gave my Ilien,;l 110 al) Irei1'X2 as to mny return ticket. lint to return to my story. A; ?? sonIC in *re ?? and a smoke, they were at it again, arrang- ine;, more ?? tor the morrow. I had had enough fun to last me a month. I iul it was no g-0(1; I must turn out the Iirst thing early and come rabbit- shootinig, and wvith this parting ill jouctioli to be up betimes in the morning we shook hands aid went to on r bedcooms, I being the only one of the crowd who tklt in am way dissatisfied with the result of the day. And so I retired to rest ou the cventtul night of the 9th ot August, 1893.

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/BL/0000098/18940409/005/0001?browse=true
Pall Mall Gazette - Monday 09 April 1894

TO DO

THE TRUTH OUT AT LAST. y BY SCOTT (rHE MlISSI'G MN). Y O 'OW AND VWI\Y I WENT ro ATI)LA.MONT, riF: SroRY oi Mr l BoAT INCinrNST ; n I Tr. DiEAT OF MR. HAINIBROUGH, ANI) MiY :UT FENsr DISAPrEARANCL t AND AOTAFNTUTilS WEIIN CHARGLD WITil IIURD. 1Y E13vARD Svr.E.NY 9 . (Ilr. Mi-'S-3 A1.NN hIMLSELr). i 

CHAPTER III.

The llunrnh lo ?? 1kr 10/A A ugvs!. 1893.--- Tk slo)T of l/: Death qf fr. Cecil entthrboug-lt-lt I Jr! .1dlZniont. 1IT muist have bcen soon after daybrcak w-vhcn I was rouscd out of bed S on the morning of thc .10th August to join Mr. llambrough and Mr. t Monson in the rabbit-shooting expedition which had been arranged - over night ; and little did I relhis thc treat, as, though I cannot say it was raining, there were evident signs of a beautiful Scotch mist. The air was cold and chilly, and the ground wet and slippery as wc started r off on the fatal jcurney. i ! ?? I must admit I took no pleasurc in thc sport uponuW hich t the others were so keen. We had not procceded very far wheti, bang- 2 bang went Mlr. Monson's gun, and I saw the Iir-t rabbit shot-the s first I had seen killed in my litc. - By the way the two shots were fired I could not help thinking, that, had the rabbit bolted my way, it was not long odds I did not get - some of the clia rge in my legs ; and having heard that it is ?? the 2 I most unconmion thing in thc Nvolid for careless and hasty young 2 sportsmen to turn round and blaze awvy at wherever the rabbit runs, ; I thought I would act as carrier, and offered to carry the game, at a respectful distance from the shooters; but I was told to let the rabbit lie where it was, and we could pick it up on the way home. The rabbit was not picked up, but nevertheless I let the guns go ahead, and whlen they were well in advance I followed them both. Bang, bang, bang, again, and again, and again, went the guns, and over rolled the rabbits, till I found myself walking along with three of them to carry. When we came to the wood Mr. Monson and Mr. Hambrough separated, the former going to the left and the latter to the right, 

whilst I grew more careful than ever, because I could not see them distinctly through the wood and fell further in the rear out of harm's wvay. Wve had not proceeded far when I heard a singlc shot fired, and I called out something to the effect, "What have you got" I received no answer, and concluded it was a miss, so I had nothing to pick up this time. Proceeding along, I came to the end of the wood, and there I saw Mr. Monson ahead of me, going towards the direction of the shot, and as we left the edge of the wood we bore away to the right, each from different angles, Alir. Alonson being a little in advance of me. Ile was carrying his gun on his shoulder. TEm. DEATHi. MIr. 1liambrouglh was not in sight. although lie should if he had kept on in his position in the wood have been out first, but I saw Mr. Mlonson ";as 4gop in the open, and as he was evidently not going to shoot I quickened my pace and was soon alongside of him. WVe turned in the direction Mr. Ilambrouglh should be walking in, and had not gone more than fifteen to twenty yards when-what did I see ? That which I call never forget. The apparently lifeless body of Cecil llambrough. MIr. IMlonson was by his side immediately, and lifted up his head to ascertain if the poor fellowv was dead, or showed any signs ot life. Ile called him by his name, Cecil, but the lips and eyes made no response. I am not an old soldier or a doctor, and the sight of this fine young gentleman lying dead before me almost took away my scared senses. I am told I helped to lift him up, and, if I was asked to, I have no doubt I assisted to the best of my ability ; but if my life was staked upon my answer I could not tell with any minuteness what did ordid not happen, or what was or was niot said, during the few seconds wve were standing by the lifeless body of Cecil llambrough-a few hours ago the bright, handsome fellow who made ?? of mlly timidity. Run to the house and get assistance was tile only thing to do, and we lost no time in doing it. Mr. Hlambrough's body was picked up and carried to the house, and the doctor sent for by messenger on horseback. On the arrival of Dr. MacMillan from Tighnabruiach about eleven o'clock in the morning, he, after a careful examination of the body, pronounced that poor Mr. Hiambroughi was dead, and be then commenced to make some inquiries, and to ask for information as to how the accident had occurred. Dr. MacMillan questioned me as to what I knewv of it, and I told him exactly what I have repeated in this story. Dr. MacMillan questioned every one he thought proper about the occurrence, and shortly after mid- day it was an undoubted, admitted fact, that Mr. Ilambroughl had met his death by an accidentally self-inflicted wvound caused by the going oft' of his owl) gull. \Wi1Y I IE T ARI)LAMONT. I naturally expected there would have to be an inquest, and with this very object in my minid I asked Dr. MacMillan \vhether it would be necessary for me to remain, and was greatly relieved when lie assured me that it would not be at all necessary, as his certifi- cate of the accident was quite sufficient, and there would be iio inquest. 1 admit I was more than pleased to hear this, as I had already seen that if I had to give evidence at the inquest I should have to explain that my real name was not Scott, and this I did not relish, not from any feeling of vrongdoing, but from a not unnatural repugnance to being shown up before every one as Ted Davis, the book- mrakr, and iiot Idward Scott the engineer; but I say, and trust my readers will believe me when I say, that had I been told it would be vell fbr me to stop I should have done so, and given my evidence without fear. As it was, however, miiy visit was at an end; poor Mr. Ilambrough was lying dead in his house, and by this time I had learnt his true position. I kqewv, of course, his family should arrive shortly. What was I to do ? I wivas iot a personal friend of his, neither was I an old friend of Mir. Monson. Was it right and proper that I should intrude myself upon the family at such a time, or ought I with as little delay as possible to withdraw and make room for those who had a better right to occupy my room in the house of mourning? I thinkl my readers will agree with me that, immediately I ascertained I Nvas not wanted and could do no good, I did the right thing in takinlg my leave imnmediately, and it would have been unseemly for me to have acted otherwise. 1 therefore spoke to Mr. Monson, and said I should go on to Glasgow by the afternoon, boat, and he agreed vith me that it was perhaps best under the circumstances that 1 should do so. Now as I recall the eve of my departure from Ardlamnout I cannot refrain froni saying a word for Mr. Monson. A \\ORD FOR MR. MoNSON. I, and I alone, was the only person who could give evidence in his favour if there was any suspicion of foul play ; and yet lie without a care for himself let me leave the place, and it is positively true that he did niot know at what address to find me. Is it probable that a person who had a guilty knowledge vould thus put his salvation from him in that free and easv manner ? for the man who could have conceived the crime imputed to hhim would have been a most astute villain, and would mnost assuredly either have detained me there for his false witness, had I been a co-conspirator, or a true witness had I been his dupe. But just think, again, my readers, false or true, which ever way he should have planned it, this supposed clever, scheming scoundrel had deliberately, by his own initiative, ruined the value of his own and only witness by bringing hiu upon the scene under a false name and occupation, which mlust most inevitably have come to light had such services been required of me as it has been suggested were within his contemplation at the time lie arranged his plot. WVhy, thenr, did I leave Ardlamnont ? Because neither Mr. Mronson nor myself had anything to fear; because I had been told by Dr. MacMillan I should not be wanted ; because it vas the most respectful andi natural thing to do under the lamentable circumstances, not to intrude myself upon mly host and hostess in their awful trouble. Theref ore, quietly and openly in the afternoon of August 10, 1893, 'without concealment or undue haste, I took the boat and returned the way I had come, entering into conversation with a police officer at Tighna- bruaich pier, with whom 1 discussed the accident, and to whom I gave the iame of my hotel at Glasgow, where I could be found if wanted. Why did I not give my permanent address ? Because I was not asked, and because I did not like to give cause for chatter to every busybody by revealing the truth I was so foolishly hiding-namely, my change of name and occupation; and because I did not think it 5 as the right and proper timing to do to Mr. and Mrs. Monson after their kindness and hospitality to me. 

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/BL/0000098/18940410/005/0001?browse=true
Pall Mall Gazette - Tuesday 10 April 1894

THE TRUTH OUT AT LAST. BY SCOTT (THE MISSING MAN). HOW AND WHY I WVENT TO ARDLAMONT, THE STORY OF THE BOAT INCIDEN? THE DEATH OF MR. HAMBROUGH, AND MY SUBSEQUENT DISAPPEARANCE AND ADVENTURES WHEN CHARGED WITH MURDER. BY EDWARD SWEENEY (THE MISSING MAN HIMSELF).

CHAPTER IV.

I am charged ?? murdering Mr. Cecil Hambrough-A warranitfor my arrest Whiy I did not ?? I evaded the police-A reward of £200 is offeredfor Wy ?? adventures as apt outlaw. I ARRIVED in Glasgow on the evening of the 10th August, 1893, and after going to my hotel found myself thinking over the unhappy calamity which had so abruptly brought to an end my two days' holiday at Ardlamont, and, being of a very nervous temperament, feared if I remained idle with nothing to do or distract my thoughts the scene which I had witnessed would prey upon me: therefore I resolved without delay to get back to my business, and so efface as much as possible the unpleasant recollection; and with this object I lost no time in getting back to London, where I remained a few days. From the information I derived through reading the daily papers I learnt of the funeral of Cecil Hambrough, who was buried in the Isle of Wight on the 17th of August, and thus seven days had come and gone since the day of the accident and my having left Ardlamont. Moreover, the funeral of Mr. Hambrough had proved the correct- ness of the statement to me of Dr. MacMillan, that there would be no inquest and that he was perfectly satisfied ; and with the exception of a few thoughts of the untimely death of so fine a young fellow, and the narrow squeak I had had of being put into a very unpleasant position and experiencing a disagreeable half-hour ins explaining to the coroner why I was Scott the engineer, the facts or the case were fading from my memory, when the rumour came out that Mr. Monson had some pecuniary interest in the policies of 

insurance upon the life of Mr. Hambrough, which was going to be I inquired into. f Here, ncw, lct me at once admit I made my awful mistake. WVhy did I not at once put myself in communication wvithl Mr. Monson on I the subject ? Why ? Because 1 knew nothing of Mr. Monson's affairs with, Mr. Hamnbrough, and nothing of any of the affairs of Mr. Ham- r brough ; and again, ItogtIws well out of the business and had better keep olit, as I could do him no good and might do myself somei lhtrfn. t I therefore resolved not to be drawn into any law suit that, as I thought, might ensue~, but now I know, like many others when too ate, how fatal a mistake I made in shunning an unpleasant duty. But wliat was this fresh rumour I-Mr. Monson going to be charged with the mnurder of Cecil I lanbrough !Impossible as it seemed to me the papers nevertheless ieported SO. 1\tVI1 I KF PT iVcF Now, my reader,, you will say, Wh y did I not at 0once go and tell all I knew ? andI my anlsw\er is, firstly, Because I knew the absokite absurdity N of the suge,esoaudddnot believe it could possibly be persisted, in; awl, secondly, because my moral courage failed me. And I will further answer the question by putting this to every one who reads this little story: Why does the schoolboy, when caught by his master tic in'; ?? c he ought not to do, however trivial, invariably to ci" qCry, are you doing, sir " say "Nothing, sir- " ? Wnr \liao' e you, tny rcadici-, \viI-,I a tradesnian has called to see you about some little account ,vII \v\i CC ?? able to pay, told the servailt to say yen were not in, vxlien it would be much more simple and truthful to see the dun and tell hinti you wer", !cry 0 could not pay the account. Because, like you, I had not the inor.l c to do the right thing at the right moment, and preencrrc, if possible, to defer the evil day, in the hope that the incident wold lod over without exposing me to open celtstilre and thtts I look the firt-F I also s3tep. The motive given by the Fapet's fot' the sippowd intir1ctcr by Nonsol was the large Sumi of money it was ?? "tcd hie would t (c -ie by lni- broughi's death ; but of this I knew nohig ,Id could throwv no lighlt lipo! it ;and as I read the accounts of ?? I. c111 gi\el CII ' Ihat Cc ' c~liwls t chronicler, of fiction, "'tile press'' I IUarnt ooleii` c the, pr1iv-ate ail! i:- of Mr. Mionsun, attd how hie Nvas iInvolvII', &C., 111 ol \V! 1'i adLX to '11V cowardly resolution to keels oilt of it. Is it to be \wondered at, whlenI I r(cA.( the t'.r Syr a xx uc, ace illt~ 'I esppers of this 111nfoune d11-\,II~ i 1( C1tllL',I' c~ should be dragged ilnto it, that as X nity I n - ?? Ir v brt-akliist readitig ?? pIalxr, t11- ?? \aro .I II1 arrest of Scott," drove whlat little reasoifiigc poxvei-s I 1110 1:1 I It ?? head, and caused Ife to lose, if not miy sienlsG , m11 power 01 II-;Il~g thelCII 1Tbus did I awvake one mor'ninlg to lilid that, wart'ant hiad, Leell yraumtcd t for my arrest on the charge ot ilnurdcrill , Citnil ?? oa 1 WHIAT I HlAD O ~ i\ WVhat had I to fear ? Thlat is tite ;lrst ?? ?? Wvoicill 1)-`ita ?? enter the mind of a rational ilndivitlual, anti it is ran Ill-': ~t I- iox It r' the verdict of the jury to say, "Nothing.' But is tl le re ally one fairl' minded, rational individutal whlo reati tile ?? of thec trial, lllhe evidence of witnesses for the prosecution, tile, swululni Il p 11 tin', Solicitor-General for the Crown, xiwlio wutillI Iave ?? said ?? At d 0' I challenge you all to say otlterwvise theitI (1 do, that tile hI` (i: nill-. depended at that supreme moment lupol trIl' cast of the dice. Although the judge, the Lord justice Clerk of Scotland, sumtined IIp stron~gly al-gailI-L the distorted case for the Crown, anmd tore the strailnl-d at gulnelit' 01 tile Solicitor-Gener'al for Sebtland ilnto pieces, for tlrc-ll'eequrtrCI- o-ii hour till' jury remainied considering whether they should Fen cul tr. Mollool to ?? (1'-Ii~l or nmot, and for that forty-five minutes his hi;1e was ill thle b_ U-.Ian'' -the li of an innocent man. Now, readers, had I anything to fear, moral cowar-1 that I ain ? 01 tim - one side I saw comparative, if' not complete, safety 1'\y dial , ciitll othei I must go to a cell in Edinburgh without friendi(I to Icher 01' IlIpII l]e,, and await my trial, where it would be tirici- agaillst 1110 that I ?? ca('0111 I Scotland under a false name, always a (Iuestion,:!1!C 1A. In Ito''. ro- proceeding, and had departed without retlm 1111" ~ ath, tii: 't ?? foul play to give an account of all I knewv. Charged with murder. Good God!I I am fi0 -s mil. I au!I a II maker, but not a murderer-not quite so bad as tliat. I\':o1I!J laa-- i~o poor Cecil Hambrough's money ;I wotuld Ilav laid hillu oid'-a;'n ''stiff 'un," but I think that is the worst lharin I wxotilt hi~.e do,'I ia or would do any man. I am a moral coward ; I confess it. I imust oal'o l-cL-uI'.'hI Ni' 'I power in the hourof danger ; for I hand bctt o01W i, leai, tldat v:-'" ' What should I do ? How should I Tsa "- o ?? nj ?? tilp situation never once entered my head, and ?? a ?? IL IttIIIt' grasped and realized my truly awvful positioll, i ?? Mlt\(i collecting a few portable possessions, with the v iCw0 oclirryinl' out In1v ,(ob idea-to get away. Away I But where ? I had moucy, 'tis true ; Cu' e"'h to carry iue eveCII to the other side of the world, it I so do-ia-d t ii~t \X 1110, v, 01111t~tn.1 ; ii me, when 1 might be arrested even ?? firs 1t Ioliteilt I ihowecd ?? I II the stireet. WVho was that man that looked inl thle Will,1oT ?? A huo tven b~ a ea detective after me ? My tormnelts ha d 'le commenced. DisouisE. Then came the idea of disguise. Tile ineamis at inI\ illtl-cedate cr 1-In mand to effectually hide my identity xxere mocagle :a leo' old . ad 'ii clothes, and to shave oft niy mnoustache, ?? serve till I C A of something more complete. It took \'er little timte to ?? the change, although 1 was quaking with fright and full of doubts as to whether my get-up would deceive a baby. I left the house, 011(1 passed out into the wide world to hide, a fugitive from the mighty armns of tlteC law-to hide, God knew how or where. I had not proceeded far from the house when I met and passed an acquaintance wvho failed to recognize me, and thus reassured I hurried on. Where should I go?" What should I do ? What could I do? I had a vague idea of going somnewhere, anywhere, by train. I knew I must put as great a distance as possible between myself and my usual haunts, and without loss of time. I would make my way to the open Park; perhaps I should get some tangible idea as I walked. Walked, did I say? Slunk, I thei-mat; for never did a beaten hound slink and cringe away from an infuriated master as I did from all contact with my fellow creatures that day. I selected all quiet streets, and avoided, every human being I possibly could as I eventually made my way to the Great Northern terminus, where I found a train about to start for Bradford. I took a third-class ticket for that place, and entered a smoking carriage with some sailors, with whom I at once entered into conversation, with the view of making it appear to any onlookers that I was not alone. Good, honest Jack Tars as they passed the bottle round, and brfore the train started we had been into the refreshment bar and cemented our friendship, and I was one of their party, thus cdv~fing the suspicions of any one looking for an individual leaving London silently, and alone; and who knows but that on that very platform might have been the warrant for my arrest?

HUNTED.

Though I did my best to be one of the jovial party, and freely passed the bottle, I cannot describe my state of mind. Every passenger that looked into the carriage was my pursuer, the ticket inspector who asked t uts, " Where for, sir 7" c'as a detective ill disguise to ascertain my destination. Every slam of a carriage door made inc start inwardly, and go hot a aind cold with fear, whilst the stoppages along tile route wxere moments of torture to me. Thank you, my jolly sailor-friends, for your company on r that day ! On arrival at Bradford I proceeded to walk from the station to the hotel. But my courage faiied iie ;I could not enter tile hotel ; so, slippiig back to the statioml I took the next tai-a to Hialifax, jumped into an enip~ty tlird- class carriage wxitb my bag, aiit between thle stations chailged my clothes. BECHSI'EIN PIANOS.-CHAS. S ILE2S and CO. offer these magnificert Pianos on the THREE YEARS' SYSTEJM at the most advantageous prices and terms. Apply for list to CHAS. 3TILES and CO., 40 and 42. Sothbimptor.ro*, Holbdrh, W. C. v .-I At Halifax I left the train, took the hotel 'bus to - Hotel, and took a room for the night. It was now past ten o'clock, and I had had nothing to eat all day, the morning paper having killed my appetite for breakfast, therefore I ordered some supper and went to bed-not to sleep: how could I? The next morning I deemed it wise to have my breakfast in the coffee-room, taking care to avoid the window and exposure of my face in every possible way. I gave my assumed name as Mr. White, and asked the landlord if a gentleman should call for me, to say I had gone on to Newcastle, and would meet him there. I then directed a label "Mr. White, passenger to Newcastle," let every one see it, and took the hotel 'bus to the station, where I booked a first-class ticket to Newcastle, and tipping the 'bus porter royally, he helped me into the railway carriage with my bag; and so if Mr. White was traced to Halifax, there was no doubt he had gone on by train to Newcastle; but between Halifax and the next station I once more changed iny clothes to the old ones, and at the little station of Ovenden left the train and walked back to Halifax, caretully destroying my ticket and paying the fare at the barrier, and thus I reached the place which I had undoubtedly left, and where I resided for a week in the humble apartments of Mrs. A., a most loquacious old lady, whose convcrs tioii was principally the latest newspaper details of the Ardlamont Mystery, and poor Mr. Hambrouglh, poor fellow! My attentive old landlady was firmly of opinion that Scott had done away with Mr. Hamborough, and would be ?? to justice and, she hoped, hanged. Dear old soul, if she had knwovn to whom she was talking!


https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/BL/0000098/18940411/005/0001?browse=true
Pall Mall Gazette - Wednesday 11 April 1894

TO DO

THE TRUTH OUT AT TRUTH LAST. ?? id By SCOTT' (THE MISSING MAN). s- How AND WHVY I WFNT TO ARDLA'MONT, THE STORY OF THE BOAT INCIDENT, TIE DEAlTH OF MR. IIAMBROUGIf, AND ?IY SUBSEQUENT DISAPPEARANCE C- I AND .ADVENTUtRES WHEN CHARGED WITH MURDER. By EDwARD SWEENEY 1r 1 (THE MISSING MAN IIMSELF). Sd 

CHAPTER V.

aM wanderings ?? surrenrder to tl/e " PALL MALL GAZETTE" and a: Strottand Yarrd. ia NOTWITHISTANDING the kindness of my landlady, I began to fear ler a- j regard for my comfort would lead her to mark my delicate statc of idihealth and asthmatical tendencies, which, of all the facts daily pub- al lished in the press, seemed ?? to give a clue to my identity. of Go I must, but where to ? There is no doubt I was badly wanted, ia and I fearcd the whole talent and resources of the police would ;y eventually tell against the game I was forced to play with such odds re against mc. is Thle only friend I had was the press. That most obliging and a, useful chronicler of the doings of' thc police kept me daily posted a as to their movements and lwarned me where to go and where not )r to gO. ts low was I to leave my landlady without creating suspicion ? r A happy idea struck me. Entering the telegraph office, I sent ic myself a wire to the eflect that my mother was suddenly taken ill of and not expected to live, and, hurrying home, I arrived in time to n. receive the telegram announcing thc tidings, which instantly put Mrs. - into a state of bustle, under cover of which I left, is with all her sympathy and good wishes, in time to catch the morning Al train for Birmingham. The whistle gave a screech, the train made a re slight movement forward and then suddenly came to a standstill, with- Ip out again moving for several minutes. What could be the cause? Had te a telegram arrived to search the train ?? Suclh, wretched man that c. I was, were the thoughts that flashed through my brain. I had purchased a newspaper, and instinctively I turned to read the latest development of the search for the missing man. Then I thought the man next to me seemed surprised at my evident keen desire for 

this news, and I ceased to read it; where-uponl the man opposite undoubtedly noticed my suspicious conduct in hd,,`ily turnigtp pages from view. This talcs time to write, and may sceemtom icaders 'absurd, but tlime were my ?? and expcri-imccz,'andr already the cold Sweat w~as upon ic' cauisug" ill, to Shiver with the cold and conuinence to cough, so that my chest ached and my lhcadI bwarn with fear and dread lest I should be betrayed by fly Wi11Ci'll"~ The 'train Spcd Onl its way for two I our-4, when we drew up at some Junction, and to my horror I perceived a tremendeus crowd evidently of the racing fraternity on the platform; the door was opened, and in they rushed, n'~ot five a side, but tcnl oil huddled together. Of course, fool that I was, they were off to the races. In that carriage I declare there were three men I knew, and two of whom ?? to have ?? mie well. Did they know nic I kept illy handkerchief to my eye as if I had something in it, Until the carriage was clnpt icd of its sporting- element, leaving me alone with a single individual, who, i oundlv abused the fraternitv x' 011 arrivi-:act m ni (Icstinat~ili I re ;alvcd not ?? F'av ?? nigh.Jt t'.v're, as I thought it un`,w`Se_ to remililn anywhere I might be traced to without a break, andl the pre 011cC of 1thle boys"' had mlad', mie at lii tic uneiiC , ; 1icr althougoh I be-l leved myi rids would s-tiiid by mte, thcre are meaily oil the turf whose acquaintancec one makes that alC not exactly reliable illiall] respects. Oil agaili, therefor e, like the \Wauderiing Jew," ?? lurtiose, II(  destination. I could ilot Stop1 where I was I could not part with my bag I imust go to a large town, and 1niimi210 wait thle lnam e. What could I do ; Oh! if I could oifly ?? i a Cle ?? ~ I c)u~ld re.- t ill peace and sleep). I took a ticket for I lotvhcucl. I could be there at n: idiii~jit. and c oiil then get on board one of the late mail trains for the North, where, as if by a fatal fascination, I was lseadily becog drawn 1.1arer and hlcarer to mx'v doom. Tl i dark an d u ii oviti ii 112rn i iil sci medic darke-r aia td more tre.. ry t i aii I had ever scciI it, buit 011( V O~tut tf, lic trail' fthe coll aiir sceilled to gove roe life anid ho0ne. 1 N-OL~d ja: i tic s mot p~eople wvending theicr Novy ti the boat, and crc-s tiic sul. Ipurciai-cd at dccli: pas agc, and wvi.~a-i it- on the ga0~,whi ~~i12Oltl ito toleiv\ e mae, nut live y'ards oh;" stood Sola-IIdntee~ixe seti/ing c-vtry p)02i~1l,!4c by tile st~rong glare of tile dlcti c li-1it. I Inlime hini, ild I h- ?? TCA 1avi ?? etly. oi LI Ic711 jill x.s 'S il reoi.C'! icy mV-tA- t' g)~o iblck xxas ii1;~ot- sible, the. iiairrw. - ait-\vav b, tvw ccc tile qmuay anid thie stalfle bilm, crc'1xled both bebiind (111d 1)0ft- icrie WlI( wth the .zaudy st reamn i assii ill ooa rd. A ?? m-ore paccs and I Fhoulii he bW hisi Sine m1st& r tile ligilt,vxx leroils I had i10t ye st.d pa OM Lo tleC Si ud W. ?? cOul1 II do iloV Coll(id I t back cr save nixielf'? A spsashi, a - ec-eamu ! I hd xd rople d my bag jiilt) the vdator bch twcol' 110( boat ands tri he ore, anld iil the Irush to dhiscover thle a-eth itli-c-i wc-s 1)11 lied ?? ?? I p~ass'd oil b1011 LI. A)balihtnil;iiin, lllthi~lt dd tal I le~t tI tbct b.y ailothl e euili-wav. Pbtikiilki out 1 r tie opell 'c,.Litry a-s laist itS liy lugs would ca1 IV 1110. 1 lide( Iothilii~ ilow hilt wha1t ,Io~jd up) i, LuIckily, ilO\CV2, I h1,1d iiL- ACI ImV iolICl' In li iec: a1itl:oue11 1 ha~ ]c,1 Ill4 y chanee1t of U0 icse anld ~1osonlit v"Iluahblos. !'trlleea to sil-,i I mcad ( imotlmin-z ill thle cp~ipr of tills; occuOrcroe, 101 I siulcerelv bc-livu it wi,is 110 acl (iliut that hirol1;ht ?? of thuk sllartc~t 1110ii il tiuc Lolldoll torce-i to i jorlicad tlhlt fii~hit. It Nvil, il cobi1 (100.11 o' dltv, whiu ii Vvo~ldl 11111W lilt up, lid 11) iliiiddkf', ?? 1112 I oill~llV,\ ?? ?? ilg -jI~t ii I Sort of (dliai) illicy Vi it' luokiwii:,- te but y-ct I ?? not go back to 1 t L i bt~i-i ltii 11 toiil to \XOLI Ii I blud ?? l uutux traCcid, I t-- lildl host joini a trallin die Oillw I N\Liv; ill, bet-liimc' ill nie1d aiil CI Ivr tillei IialLie MY 4.1N ully iluit- O ?? ?? lily oip)ear-cl~t) eiiar:-l, :idi -3iccl sceorily ill 1cc COOI. IryI 6ci ed not lcxuv by tIn. bcatci 1.1k) TLred, ?? bac -ei c I at last arrived at a li~til iim aI a I-b 511 ll t~ud tliE -,oud 1:onc t pcoplc tto ?? 5'xith t i'-r iiaulii'g, \.Uir 1to I o llt' >1121a l ?? ( l2.2i leiI- t;(, owxx:lr ?? Li vn ap cj y iit l illl I (I-termincid ItI0tC to f -om pleet to pllice~, axvtuidjioT- cli I -XiIi cdi U le ti -rrhibi- ( l i It' o tir I pol ie WCt .ld pr F0,1v 1 C del r i~ll 11. r~pchx',auil l1r ?? x'v-0'ld bet ?? hcavv x- v- xv ClerixIL; 4! Co~iluive-d OIL. 11101 41t ?? iii', ]tolly a0ld ?? to acvaxloia:ic. \\'llat tciullt I seil ? 111li o' . I ?? ?? I ?? w ii'" tocka D av atier' dcxv I drove iv i Ittle tniuv, ile0ver Stil via g ill 01l Villha ge Ilrutc' tlian a week, giviiilS_ 01 Vseli, tile, to write to tlit alt verti-ilcg 111111 'L it! g(ttiilg II Ilijithillies ) pamt'ls 01 (hiecp Je~ile~ry, whiih Ii 1 11011( t oiild dispose of' ea4sily and 11iiik'' a pro-fit. Of cr~cit. per Ceilt, I hi s NV,: pr ine work, a id it' the 10 e, - tlier xxv101 x-arllr 101 1co-uld Staind a I c cit it, as I iulc thre111 cleaired illy C-1115'ises, 0110 I l1' ?? thoul two ililulths, pasdilly tilac wcithi- lit eveci a sfiadlowi ol - scare, readilig dietiir lt learning liixv Z'catt had becii anr c~tcd Ill all par-LS Of Lr1JiJa\id ?? 'ihie tliahi of \Ir. I`-ullolI is declicteiy tixed. It nicust nlot hi' inmagiiied that all this tube I had rot felt very keenly tile position ill 'whit h I had icit hill aiid tlil prej~udi~c I x creating against him hobt Lowu Cosld I alter it ? If thc traci wiere told Ito ?? could cattilt to 1h11im v-, "About liily pr-cscliic. I !ow iaoxiouuly 1 read the papersr v11d p)ondered o vtir thle ircpori 5. abolC(- thai oii t . Itioui-Iit oi goilig to Sceotlanid, but toy I il agfilled hiO' .11 ?? at thle it- .lvtI wa ma Iide. 1 dicadetl thle (-omsequten ces of lily illi.-it ill xv' mlore tiilli tue mg 111111 clarpc, ailid this~ kept u'IlV LIv'-. I ]- lax h-n I s'luit ll' Liux\e C~t- ilut-d na; oi itiuciralit ?? had ?? 'I lie police atre ona'e nlone (II 10 ill \Viio is tile hulle 11,1 Las i)ee"l wimth lli in c c the 'Ivax-? WXlm 1 I auilllie l<, 1111d Ile s~ci-iis ICo el:ve Ino bli~lil---s but to VtIi iic. I riltl X~tlit1ecl I l,.tn CtIlivictd o1 itt.. i XX- ill ?? to a~ici ad so I urcicriiiv tea antl a'-k fr-a my bill for two daxy a' I-tI' Lit ilxqtuiet liotti. Iljaviiig, paiid maly bill, I go to the stible to gct my), pony, but ;;!id lit)' slilixiter ('Vt Itil~ie : uit lie, L,-ec(-5 ilii \vithI L Cullili~illtlit oil illy tlirli-o' it, Ut -irilig to iPano\x' whCeiCC I ?? an-i., hih 1 ?? ?? I aoln kliscoveredt ; ilhe game is 01p. 0 \V wit a mccilelit meians to await tile, armrival of a wa~rranlt. What blhall I (IC) ? I iliist t one Iio tdale cald show~ 110 SIgil of' Ily ink-li - tliuls. If I (14 I Slirill probably be forcibly dretained until the \x arm-art shall amrrive. ?? turf' expe-iice stamics by nic and gives nice fronit enough noet to shlow signis of -supicioll ; and I enter imito a deal wvith limy xocmid-l-c- captor for the sale 01 a riing by %wic'ih line, throtughl his a' smrimed eagernict - to ba, aniry betrayed hliiisc if to ] 1110 01,( p~Iretciiditi.- I ?? ti ,, ing Oal (, ticeided to delay lill) departuret jlto-iflorrow iii 01 .C that tlly CilStllr tint' r11) meeivc 1101 remitjtancet xxlici ?? 11amIliil, Iu o wich lie will pay nic tluiee trimlms thes winle o-f thle ]'inl lit 11 1 xx onl' wait amid gi Cv liimii the Chi-Ileo. h-hall I ev-er beat himm ? I 4,11 aireaidy ,ee the oflliurs aIl~vrii-im'z, in fec-I1 tlie-iiandCUnf% Onl mle, tiniihes,, I call ?? awa''y, a,d:c there is mio inc0: t' intlct a leW hours Itoto d:o . a Li ti ci tci ?? \ARI.xmntOW EI-cAPIr. I Thi- cveueli,.g trai-a lcave -at seven o'clock ; it wxill be dark, and I n111S 11 do it. So, like a Inolse, I crept away through the back, out of the garden, tl an(l to the stiatioie, caught the up train to Chester, and betore my iritiid o could hivllV LtailI ?? I xxmS gonle lufcd put luiis between us, chil ngulig | trains at eveiV jimlIctiill, t-avt-lling all nigiit. I (Xerlt straigit northm - t, tihe hu;3v tov'.-ii l Nc-vcatlo -,liei c I ?lci;iU,' miore withi vi-thiing but whiat i stohd ut i~l. How I got away, how I ever 1V21s traced, I do not know : but certain I am that that man was, a detective, and had he not taken so long to make up his mind about me, or the authorities to act upon his suspicions, I should have been arrested. But money will not last for ever; amd now my pony and trap wc'me t3 gone, and the jewellery game quite played ouit. I wxas in a terrible state oi miid, anl rjesolved to tlike to big ?? an1d try to get work. I bou eht--in clothes dlid tried tor wxorl ; but it is hard enough tor 