# Hambrough Notes

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0002941/18700212/056/0007
Hampshire Independent - Saturday 12 February 1870

Tuesday last public disiesting ad of D ud ley Albert haw a saraero hawse by the yaws to had met . - Maws. Bask Judd Ism the wed being the fret is to s dinner la they be as complete of the course, it !arena a musk haw doff of wallas, additioad goaded guests wee frilly appraised. The Wisdoms wee tideful(y wed Wm- for taste sad elopes. tables whisk rs W a tt a mambo? r aP and bill of fare woe doh as a to roes, sad, in foot, the b i Alto , Mom es to Nesse el the Nailed! AMMO ; after which the bele " Prime Waheand es reel ad the Ro yal Net with as " The aneys e ssa d d was espied is by Captain None. the abeam of General John Cheape, he amembly and militia, Camplin for the Volunteers, who, in the comes of his speech, made gears MA h had held by the Voiseleers) had looked kneed la weep at their thy amid ad but Is the r F d bet he to it a law mad he est a few about would be them, bed is every asthma TIN al taw ovate( by the that Mr. with peeks fled maim& He wee r ww Uat the wal wield act forget it. Rs could sot look the beaming of the young gentleman beside him just entered apes amaboad's many duties withost anticipating for sat and brilliant parser, although ai the sem lima be maid not bat regret that for some time ha lama be from a lneality in which be had already re away friends. The toast was drank with hearty and the toastmaster (Mr. Hilbeet, of in energetically giving th e b ea t s , b r i ng i ng d own th e of a chandelier with his baton , which narrowly mimed that functionary's respectable when at length he could make hi mse lf h ear d, awls present for the hearty way in which he had bean remised, and the honour they had done him. His late father's memory lad been touched on in a previous speech, and for the many kindly epithets which had been need in with it, he thanked them very much. Re only that he should his in such a m anner as t o cause hie friends and neigh- bours to speak of him after ho wee gone with equal kind- nese and respect. After a few more remarks expressive of the pleasure be felt in meeting so goodly an assembly as the present, he sat down amidst renewed cheering.—ln returning thanks for the " Town of Ventnor," Mr. T. Burt, as ow of the oldest inhabitants, maid he could well recollect the time when Ventnor was nut. There was a niece called " Ventnor Farm," but that was all. Mr. Iltmbrough's grandfather, when ho aline into this neigl.- honchoed, anticip ited a quiet retreat from the turmoil of and the cares of society. In purchasing the 

 Steephill estate. he expected to be far removed from any town, or collo 'non of houses ; but no sooner was the Castle built than people began to build here and there, in what is now called Ventnor. and gradually the town grew. Now, when Mr. Hambrough thus found his ex p ec t a ti ons disappointed, did he leave the neighbourhood or otherwise show his vexation? No, be accepted his new position, and the duties which were attached to it, and be commenced by building St. Catherine's Church ; and the present still growing and prosperous town is , to a great extent, the result of the fostering care and generosity thus bestowed upon its infancy. Mr. Dudley Hambrough, now present, and whose majority they bad met to celebrate, now stands in the same position as that occupied by his grandfather thirty or forty years ace, and from what he (Mr. Burt) had heard, he had no doubt that he would occupy his important position in such a manner as to give satisfaction to his neighbours and do honour to himself.—The health of Mrs. Verner and the ladies of Steephill was then proposed by Mr. Martin, which being drank with honours, Dr. Leeson returned thanks in a few appropriate words. He then named "the clergy," which was remanded to seriatim by the four clerical gentlemen prew-nt, Mr. Wills, by reason of the virtues of " Good old Bt. Catherine," taking the precedsuce. Mr. Peile referred to the great kindness he had individually experienced from the late Mr. Hambrough and his amiable family. It was, in fact, indirectly through him that be bad taken up his residence in Ventnor. He liked meetings of the present character ; it threw ople together who would otherwise not have the opportunity of making one another's acquaintance. Clergymen could for a time drop their strict clerical character ; fur his part, be liked to associate occasionally as well as to teach, and he had made many friends at the dinner table. After a few more remarks complimentary to the gentlemen occupying the post of honour, he proposed the health of the worthy chairman, who had just taken a new lease of life, if he might so call it, and none who knew Mrs. I Lemma could say that the doctor had acted otherwise than wisely.—ln returning thanks Dr. Leeson thanked Mr. Peile for his ingenuity, and assured him of no better prescription, and sat down amidst cheers and laugher.—The committee and secretary being proposed by the chairman, who referred to the secretary's readiness to couple himself with any scheme which crould in any way promote the welfare and happiness of his fellow townsmen.—Mr. Tirueman rose and said the absence of the original secretary, Mr. G. M. Burt, was occasioned by the loss of a near and dear relative, and having in a few appropriate I words referred to the prospects of the town, and the auspicious event they were celebrating, Mr. Wells, in the absence of Dr. Whitehead, named " the ladies," a toast which met with its accustomed warm reception. Mr. Wells liked to propose " the ladies," and he was sure everybody liked to drink their health. He hoped he should be forgiven if he expressed a hope that in the hearts of most of those present the ladies were indelibly engraven. During the evening attention had been called to the rapid growth which had been made by Veatnor. He thought it a pity that a more uniform plan had not been considered in the construction of the town. The natural features, which in the Undercliff are everywhere charming, had not been sufficiently preserved. That, however, was to be expected from the eleemosynary way in which the town had been built. Now a large portion of the Steephill estate was about to be thrown into the building market for the erection of first-class residential houses, and a plan worked upon which, when the new town was completed, would combine the proper position and classing of roads and houses with the elimination of all that wee naturally beautiful (a voice : " The ladies"). He believed that this was a great prospect for Ventnor. He had noticed that the shops increased in undue proportion to the surrounding residences. Perhaps in the whole Undercliff there was no place to compare in natural beauty with Steephill. He who had seen the sun's noontide rays glistening upon the—(crles, " the ladies, the ladies"). Gentlemen, if you interrupt me so I shall lose the point. I was going to say—. The chairman : But when are we to get to " the ladies." Mr. Wells : As I see you are in a hurry, gentlemen, I will not detain you any longer than to propose in all respect " The health of the ladies." This was drunk " bumpers all," and the chairman, Mr. Hambrough, and several others left.—Mr. T. A. Baynes was then elected to the chair, and a vote of thanks parsed to Masers. Bush and Judd for the admirable manner in which they had carried out their arrangements. The meeting did not separate till a late u. hour, when all ext-reseed themselves delighted with the evening they had spent. —The gentlemen acting as the committee, and with whom the project of the dinner originated, are Mr. T. Burt, Mr. T. A. Hams, Mr. G. M. Burt, Mr. T. H. Urry, Mr. L. B. Tnmen, Mr. F. Truernan, Mr. Moore, and Mr. Gibbs.

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000495/18700319/047/0008
Hampshire Advertiser - Saturday 19 March 1870

Serious Accident. — We are sorry to have to record that on Wednesday Mr. Dudley Hambrough, of Steephill Castle, met with a serious accident while playing at football in a field adjoining the Castle. It seems that Mr. Hambrough and another gentleman were kicking at the ball, when they came into collision, and Mr. Hambrough's leg was broken. Dr. Whitehead was at once sent for, and set the limb, and we hear the unfortunate gentleman is progressing favourably.

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000069/18700713/015/0004
Hampshire Telegraph - Wednesday 13 July 1870

ISLE OF WIGHT. NEWPORT. 3 AAgents.-Messrs. J. & W. GuBsnIs. THE CONTAGIOUS DIsEAsES Acts.-On Frida evening last the Queen's-rooms, Newport, were crowded with women of various classes to hear Mrs. Josephine Butler- the wife of the Rev. George Butler. of Liverpool College -deliver a lecture on the operation of the Contagious s Diseases' Acts. Upon the platform were the Rev. S. Atkinson, Wesleyan Minister, and J. C. Honey, Bible Christian Minister, Mr. Stabb, of the Midnight Move- . ment, Mr. Cooper, of the Rescue Society, Mr. E. J. Up- ward, Mrs. Butler, and Miss Wolstenholme. The Rev. S. i Atkinson proposed Mr. Upward, one of the town coun- e cillors, to take the chair, and stated that while the body r of the hall was filled with women, Mrs. Butler wished on the platform to be supported by ministers and her other friends, because what she had to advance would not 1' offend the most delicate sensibility, and could with equal freedom be spoken to men as to women.-Mr. e Cooper seconded the proposition, which was carried a unanimously.-Mrs. Butler then delivered the ad. I dress of which we last Saturday gave a copious report. z The meeting was also addressed by the Rev. S. Atkinson, who moved the following resolution: "That a petition be a sent to each House of Parliament for the immediate and e total repeal of the Contagious Diseases Acts relating to t women, and that it be signed by the chairman on behalf s of the ?? Rev. J. C. Honey seconded the a resolution, which was put to the meeting and unani. a mously ?? then addressed the meeting, i, and a local committee was formed to co-operate with the t society which is endeavouring to secure the immediate and - total repeal of the Contagious Diseases Acts.

...


VENTNOR. Agents-Messrs. KNIGHT & SON. CHARGE AGAINST A VENTNOR TRADESMAN.— At the Isle of Wight Petty Sessions, on Saturday last Thomas Reynolds. confectioner, of Ventnor, and George lightfoot, a youth, were charged with a breach of the Poaching Act, 1862.-Mr. H. B. Hooper defended.-P.C. Crouch deposed: On Thursday morning, at 5 o'clock, I was on duty at Steephill Castle. Saw the two defendants in a field. They afterwards went into a footpath, and Lightfoot began beat- ing the hedge. Reynolds was standing near with a gun. They saw me standing some distance off, and they began running. I got over the hedge and ran after them. Over. took Reynolds in Church-street. Ventnor, with a gun and a rabbit. Reynolds threw the rabbit down near his door, and it was warm when I picked it up. They were on Squire Hambrough's land when I firstsaw them.-Cross- examined by Mr. Hooper: I know Reynolds well. He is a confectioner at Ventnor. He bad on a light coat and hat. I might be 200 yards off when I saw them together. I don't know what became of Lightfoot-I lost sigbt of him. Where I saw Reynolds was in the direction from Ladv Pelham's. Defendants came along the cliff together, and for a portion of time I lost sight of both of them.- Mr. Hooper said he should be able to show the Bonch that Mr. Reynolds had no right to be brought before them. He was a respectable confectioner in in the town of Ventnor, and he had the permission of the Hon. Evelyn Pelham, and also of Lady Pelham, to kill rabbits in their grounds. On the morning in question he went there alone with his gun, and succeeded in killing a rabbit. On the same morn- ing Lightfoot, who had been down to the shore to bathe, fell in with another man with a gun, and it was those two whom the policeman followed. They separated, and in the 3 course of his pursuit the policeman overtook Mr. Reynolds .comig from Lady Pelbam's, and as he bad a gun and a rabbit, the constable concluded that he was the same man .whom he had seen with Lightfoot. It was altogether a .groundless charge against Mr. Reynolds, who as a leading ,tradesman of Vetner would not be likely to commit him- , self in this manner, and for the sake of a rabbit to offend his best customer.-P.C. Crouch was recalled by the chair. man, in reply to whom he said: Reynolds was running t when I came up with him. I am sure he is the same man I saw with Lightfoot. He was not two minutes out of my ?? Blake, called by Mr. Hooper, said he lived at Ventnor, and on Thursday morning, about half past four, he was going to Steephill Cove, where his fithter lived, when he met Mr. Reynolds just coming out of Mr. Pelham's property. He had a gun and rabbit, and was I alone. About 20 minutes afterwards he saw a young man whom bethought to be Lightfootjoin a man who had a gun. E That man was not Reynolds. Reynolds had on a brown high hat and a brown coat. The other man wore a Scotch cap and a light ?? said he saw no man with a Scth cap on. There was a man in black there, but wit- ness did not know who he ?? Chairman said there I was some doubt in the case, of which the Bench gave defendants the benefit, and the summons was dismissed.


https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000170/18630214/018/0004
Isle of Wight Observer - Saturday 14 February 1863

VENTNOR. On Wednesday, the 4th instant, a telegraphic message reached Steephill Castle, announcing tha death of Mr. John Hambrougb, and the next morning the sad news were confirmed bv the tolling of the parsing bell of St. Catherine's Church, Ventnor. It appears the deceased gentleman was seized, whilst taking an airing his carriage, with a spasmodic fit, to which he had been subject before and recovered, but in this case the attack proved fatal, and he expired on Wednesday morning, a short time after the attack, his only surviving son Oscar Hambrough, and Mrs. Hambrough being the only relatives present, as when first taken his illness was not considered sufficiently serious to warrant the summoning the remaining members of ths family. For a number of years Mr. Hambrough had suffered from weak health, which had brought on an affection of the eyes, and ultimately he had been totally blind. He left Ven nor about twelve years ago, and has resided since chiefly in London, whilst the late lamented Mr. Albert Hambrough occupied the Castle at Steephill. With regard to the deceased gentleman and his connection with Ventnor, it may be said that he found it a wilderness and left it cultivated garden ; and if it is true, as a great political writer of last century said, that " he was the greatest benefactor of his species who made two blades of grass grow where only one grew before," and if houses and gardens may be substituted for grass, then John Hambrough can claim to be a benefactor, as when he came to Steephill some thirty years ago, where there was one house and garden there are now fifty. In short, he gave to the place great impetus by the purchasing of the house and grounds at Steephill of the then Earl of Dysart, replacing the house by the splendid building known as Steephill Castle, the grounds of which he caused to be laid out a style compatible therewith. He brought a most excellent taste to bear on all things; and in addition to the castle, large conservatories and orangeries were erected, and no expense was spared render the place everything that ease and affluence combined could desire, added to which the inside of the castle displays cultivated taste and refined judgment in the selection of the different costly and splendid articles of science and art, amongst which can be enumerated many rare and choice paintings by the old and modern masters, baaides sculpture and antiquities; indeed almo.-t every branch of science and art, the middle ages up to the comparatively modern times, may said to be represented. A fine collection of geological specimens, no doubt the best in the Island, has been added to the above by his son, the late Albert Hambrough. The hospitality of Steephill Castle during the residence of Mr. Hambrough, sen., was of the genial English kind ; and it often resembled an hotel in that respect, from the number of the guests assembled. Respecting his connection with the town of Ventnor, he built and endowed St. Catherine's Church, and the parsonage house; and last, not least, he gave the land and built a school-house, now enlarged, to which many of the present generation owe their knowledge of the three It's. In truth it may be said that Mr. Hambrough, if not the actual founder of the place, certainly gave the first impetus towards its rise and present aspect. Thus it will be seen that this true specimen of the old English gentleman " has left his foot-prints on the sands of time," and has bequeathed an amount of good done in his day that generations to come will be benefitted; and fear, without any desire to flatter, that the gaps left in society by the deaths of John and Albert Hambrough will long remain open. His remains were brought to Ventnor, and the funeral took place on Wednesday last, and was quite plain and unostentatious. The hearse left Steephill Castle quarter-past 11, and arrived at St. Catherine's Church about 12 o'clock. There were only two mourning coaches followed, which contained Mr. Oscar and the Rev. Mr. Hambrough (the eldest son of Mr. Albert Hambrough); the Rev. J. X. Coleman, many years the incumbent of Ventnor, followed in the second coach ; Dr. and Mr. John Martin also followed their carriage, and about 50 of the tradespeople and inhabitants of Ventnor on foot. The coffin was of lead, encased with polished oak with gilt mountings. The inscription stated the date death and that his age was 69. Besides the Rev. Mr. Heath, the officiating minister, there were present the Revs. Levingstone, Fielden, Sharp, and Piele. After the service, the coffin was lowered into the vault, where lies his mother and son. Requicscat in pace." Tows Commissioners c. thk Press.—The resolution passed at the ratepayers' meeting, calling upon the Commissioners to rescind their restrictions upon the Press, was forwarded to the Board at their meeting on Monday, and acknowledged as "received." As no motion was made the subject, or indeed any further notice taken of it, we conclude the resolution found its way to the waste-paper basket; and the only reporter who condescends to act under the restrictive resolution of 1850 is Mr. Commissioner Moor of the Ventnor Times, and who, as commissioner, formerly helped to vote other reporters out of the room. It appears that he is prepared to eat the proverbial peek of dirt for the sake of selling his paper; yet, notwithstanding that his reports have , been stigmatised times out of nnmber as wilful misrepresentations and falsehoods by almost every member the Board, no sooner a proposition made to rescind the obnoxious resolution and admit the press free, than these men are content to be misrepresented rather than ; have correct reports and fair criticism. Moreover, this precious specimen of a reporter has submitted times out number to all sorts cf indignities and insults from the leading members of the Board ; thus realising the couplet: M Patient in all abuse,— lie found contempt and kicking have their use.** 

