# Ardlamount — IW Press



https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001960/18930819/089/0006
Isle of Wight County Press - Saturday 19 August 1893

Ventnor Town Amusements

On Monday evening,  ...TO DO meeting to...

...

THE LATE MR. CECIL HAMBROUGH

The Chairman said busißcw for wfaiefa the meetiac «M called now over. He would with their permission introduce another matter. Doubtless they had all heard of the sad death of Mr. Cecil Hambrough. (the Chairman) amonyrt tbe decrraaintr number of inhabitants who could remember that young gentleman'a grandfather, and no one who knew him could ever forget his kindness of heart and his sympathy with ererr movement calculated to promote the interests of the town- Then the fr** of this young man was well known to them and alike very modi respected. Indeed it waa his great kindness of heart which led to hi* misfortunes. They all remembered hie ever readiness to lend the beautiful groonda of Staephill Castle for any and every object which wan supposed of any to the town, and his other kind acta were auuh that he hoped the youngest amongst them would never forget Coming to Mr. Cecil Hambrough, Mr. Houston had allowed him to aan letter (Mr. Houston) had received from the deceased only n week before bis untimely death, in which this youog msn, only 20 years of age, having heard that Mr. Houston was not well, iarited him np Scotland, thinking the change of air would do him good. It really seemed that kindness of heart waa hereditary with the Hambrough family, for in the midst of bis own pleasures this young man found time think of the health of his friend. They in Vrntnor knew little of Mr. Cecil personally, but this one set alone would stamp his character. did not know how far it might be convenient in tbe town to attend the funeral. For himself should certainly make effort to do to, for in time of this heavy addition to their many troubles ha thought the town would do itself honour by remembering tbe family and their many kinduesoe*. Ur. F. B. Sheppard laid could endorse every word the Chairmen had said and if it met the views of that meeting, which wee Urge and representative one, wonld propose that vott of moat sincere sympathy be psassn and forwarded to Ur. and Mrs. Hambrough an an expression of the feeling of the town. Thin carried unanimourijr, and the meeting dieperaad. 


https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001960/18930902/095/0008
Isle of Wight County Press - Saturday 02 September 1893

THE FATALITY TO MR. W. D. C. OF Our Ventnor Correspondent writes: The one absorbing lapse in Ventnor riasa Thatadsy te tea startling term the Atillinial shHiring ram hmtehan in Ike af Mr. A. J. Monson aa ahatfen of sh noting Cecil Hambraugh, heir to the StarphOl WDOse douj wm lorhuigoh mgo 10 Ventnor from Scotland for interment. It win that on the morning of 10te Lieut. nfimhaaMh want out to teoot in plsntetion aloes to Ardlmnont House, Argyllshire. He was aaaemjnuted Mr. Mtmaossbte guardian, and Edward Scott, anginaar, the tetter roily with the intention of carrying tha rama. Both and Mr. Monaoa had la goimi through tea plantation they lamented, and in fate mirmtea (aeeaediag te hiaatetamaat) heard shot fired. Ba called te Mr. Ham brengh, ateiafi urn what ha had killed, bat evasivad reply. Reasing tea direction from whence tea abut earns band tha nnfnrtmmla young man lying on his left tide in ditch, with gtuuhot wound immediately bteiad the left ear, and the hernias protruding. Np oas waa hreida him, and tha auapiStm aubaaqaaatir areas that tea irodnd could ate ham bean ealf-mfiietad. Tha droeaord is reported to tera bam insured in an eeeriran offim for £lO,OOO, and. tew A doctor and police oMcinl visited sosaa of tha occurrence juturday, and body Use drcraaaf is to exhomad. Since tbe death Mr. Hambrough, Mr. MotMoa haa baan entertaining party af friends Ardbmoal Houss and yesterday laoeming was driving of his guests to Tlghaabeiuteh, miles from home, to catofa tha aariy morning •trainer for Greenock. Mr. has hem rioently oadar the sorveilbam of two plain efalhm oaasubtea, and one of team aooompaamd tea party on tea ounveyaaos Whan about two tease read, Mr. Maaaaa and hie party were mat Chief Constable Fraser, of Aigylkhin, who told Mr. fatmaelf in custody charge of ring earned the death of Lieutenant Hambrough. of tha 4th Wart Yorkshire Militia, tha iast. Tha pemoner took tha matter oooiy, and, entering tea tram want with him and tha other eonatabte to Royal Hotel, wbam they nmaiaad until abant 11 o’clock, whan Mr.Mouaou taken to county polios-office te laretmry. In the afternoon ba waa brought before Sheriff Sobstitote Sharp. On tea motion, however, of hia agent, Mr. M'Lachlan, tea azaminatiaa wm adiaamed to admit of the prisoner's his wife sod family residing Ardtemoot Homs body of the deoamad, which is to exhumed, waa laid in what it wm thought would ba ita teat resting place, in St Catharine's Church, Ventnor, in the aaeaa brick grave in which another member of the family had haw bnriad. spplimtion the Hume Secretary lor authority to exhume the body despatched to tea Home Office on Thursday morning. Mr. Monson was on Thursday again taken kef ore Sheriff Substitute Sharp. Tha pernwi diage tram conducted in private, but it is understood that Mr. Mooson adheres to the account already given by him of what he knew of the death of Mr. Hambrough. At the condos von of the examination, which lasted about half aa hour, Mr. Monson was remanded in custody for a ??? week, pending fa??rther inquiry. As a prisoner on remand, he is alhnrcd ia prieua tea omtomary privilager, including the aupplT his meals from one of the hotels in Inverary????. Dr. UsoMiltes who azamiaad Mr. Hambrough'a body two hours after death, gars it his opinion that death might have been earned tbs demised hand ling gun iocaotioatly while getting osar walk Thin wm tbe assumption that hod barn using abort 20-boas ■porting, gnu. It was •übaeqaendv ssrurtsitsed that it wm teng 12-bora. As to this, Mr. Monson states that they had exchanged guns. Mr. Barren, acting factor Ardlamout estate, says that Mr. Hambrougb's left aids??? was towards his friend, and shot in the right side. His impression latent deceased met his death by falling white his gun at full cock. Mr. had lud him that the death hit fneud teas money him. Mr. Hambrough only 23 years of age.


https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001960/18930902/076/0005
Isle of Wight County Press - Saturday 02 September 1893

THE ARDLAMONT SHOOTING CASE.

Writing last night our Ventnar Correspondent says it was rumoured during the day that the Home Secretory had sent an order for the remains of Mr. Hambrough to be exhumed, but up till 6p.m. the Vicar had heard nothing officially. There is little doubt that an order will come, and it is hourly expected.—Another correspondent statea that Mr. Monson waa the deceased gentleman's tutor, not his guardian.

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001960/18930909/034/0003
Isle of Wight County Press - Saturday 09 September 1893

THE ARDLAMONT SHOOTING FATALITY. EXHUMATION OF LIEUT. REMAINS, AT VENTNOR. Public excitement a Ventnor this sad fatality aad latest dardopmeat of easa eulmiaaMd an. Monday, whan party at medical men officials arrived from Bent lead with the aathqpty of tbe Secretary of Stats to exheuae the body of Lieut. Wiadaor Ceeil Dudley Hanbrough for postmortem oxammatson. Fur sevaral (Uya previously tha grave hod been visited hundreds of [unnua. aow-e taken thither by feelings of sympotky, others from morbid ennoaty; but throughout tba Undercliff amongst inhabitants there existed hot one feeling deepest regret at untimely desth our unfortunate young neighbour and desire that had—os mpwwn seemed to point to-naot hie and by foul ff" * I*"'* « should puaiabed the pcuridaa. On Monday from ewly hour e crowd begin eenmUe outside the churchyard, end during dm afternoon the walls which form the angle of Oiorokstreet and Tbe Grove, the letter bmag ground, were lined with Tbe Rev. J. Hall Shaw, vioar of Vont- Chief .OcnMable of the Isle of Wight, Mr. Gtboon, wore lingering about in state naoortainty ao to when they might expect tbe party, and it was nut tall into upon o’clock that they drove in boa tha Roysl Marino Hotal. A motoMger shortly afterwards came to the Vicar and Mr. Gibson, who proceeded to the Hotel, when former received the order at the Secretary of Stain, aad be at one* placed the churchyard in the baodsM the anthoritiaa. The party (rum Scotland comprised Mr. J. C. Maculiieh, of Inveeary. Procurator Fiscal: Mr. T. McNanghtoa. hi. deoutv iT’toT'T * Jt* Edinburgh; and Dr. McMillan, who represented the Crown; aad Dr. Sanders, id Edinburgh/ for tbe prioonm Munson. Messrs. Ingram Sons were engaged to open the grave and coffin aad convey the body to aad from tbe mortuary ia Ventaor Cemetery where the pesf-siorfem examination to be conducted. The grave wee opened in the presence Mr. MoNaughtoa and Mr. Gibson, and at&SO the ooffia was raised once more to the surface at tbe ground, apparently nnsuiled. It was large mamita oothu at panelled oak, with handxnme silverplated mounting*, and silk oord and tassels on the handle*, it being tbe custom ia Scotland for the mourner* to grasp the cord attached to tbe handles when lb* it lowered to its last meting place. tbe of Mr. Hambrough'e funeral this custom was, however, dispensed with. Div.-Sergt. Adams and P.GL's Toemcr and Johnson atoistad tbs grave diggers, aad tba ooffin waa without delay conveyed to bears* in waiting, and driven off in charge the sergeant to toe moruaery. at churchyard. the public were ngoroosly excluded from tbe Cemetery precaution which proved very Moratory, a* the fading light the poto-storfiem had to be made bier in the open sir, to that photographs at the corpse showing the wound ia several aspects might be Mcnred. The medical expert* were joined the Cemeterr J J -. Wh.tehemd. .bo an S* l fe". had been engaged by Major ft"""* * vbe examination on hi* behalf. The Major hunerlf waa distracted spectator of the eumuwtion, bat hie Mr. A. Hoaston and Mr. J. G. Livesav prevailed upon him to keep in the upper part of the Cemetery, aume distance away. The lend cufbn inside was found to ha leaky, benoe deoompoaitioa was very (rent. The rarpae wM formally identified Dr. MoMUUa amt Mr. MeNaughton, an that Major Hambrough waa eared that painful duty. Mr. J. Porter was engaged to photograph the oorpee, which AXDOtcd to the rntieeaea of the antboritioe, the reprenatoUrea of the Prea* were oaablr to obtain much information ounceming the moHem, bat certain faela wein permitted to transpire. The fatal wound was of shocking nature, extending in an almost horisuotal direction fixns the base of the bxahi to the centre of the ear, a portion of which was carried away. Thera was no singeing of the hair or skin around, nor were any wads found in the wound, might bare been the esse had the shot barn fired at ohrae quartera; and froxi this and other appeatanoec the medical experts bare arrived at the conclusion that the discharge which killed Lieut. Hambrough was fired from distance of not leas than 14 paeaa. Several pellets ware extracted from the bead. Then the hormeotal direction of the wound ia against the theory of accidental death, tor it ia impossible to imsgme how a gun carried by any one person could gel in position level with and pointing the back of his head and then explodu Interviewed our representative. Major Earn* brongb. while remarking that be was unable to make any statement at the present time, being ia sense in the band* of the police, said that it waa fact that two policies had bran effected on his son’s life, each for £10,000, ia the New York Mutual office, and that a few days before the death of his son they were both assignad to Mrs. Monson, not to the prisoner. The prisoner elated to an undischarged bankrupt, no that his errditon would benefit from any sum of money going to him. The assignment to Mrs. Monaco by mi cot—for Lieut. Hambrough would not have attained hie majority till April next—waa illegal, and the insurance company had sxpraaaad their willingness to pey the £20,000 to the person legally entitled, and there is little doubt that this ia Major Hambrough. In reference to the alleged exchange of runs between the deceased end Mr. Henson, It is stated that since the Utter's arrest 16 cartridges made with ordinary gunpowder, of the harass hie own gun, have been found in the deceased's shooting jackal, and among them was not one bent* cartridge, whereas the prisoner stated that the deceased waa shooting with hiajlbs prisoner’s) gun and using unbent* cartridges. The stipes ranee of the wound, too. ia consistent with the belief that smokeless powder each ss embsrite bed been need in tbs cartridge. Same little time ago Major Hambrough wrote to the prisoner asking him for lbs whereabouts of kin sen. this communication Mnnoon replied, “Sir. lam not your ton’s keeper, but believe is at Biaaiay Halt” Thu letter will be produced at the trial The procurator-fiscal and deputy, with medical witnesaee, left Tentnor at 7.28 on Tuesday morning. Dr. Littlejohn, of Edinburgh, who perfoimed the operative part of Urn pott-mofiem examination, arrived ia Lnndna in the afternoon, and had a lung interview with the Lord Advocate at the office of the Secretary for Scotland. The bod; era* mnterred the pariah churchyard 10 o'clock un Monday niaht rvirhout any religioua cetemonr, and the proceeding* were watched a lango number pereuna, who lingered about till the laataad olHoee in connection with thia lamootabte fatality were performed. Throughout the day the leland police, under Deputy Chief ConataUe Gibeoo, did excellent aervice aaaiating to maintain quiet decorum on the part the apectatora, and although the utmoat reapect and aympathy were evinced the crowd, yet theeffortaof the police were highly appte'ciated by the inveetigatora, the Deputy Procurator- Fiecal himeelf to that effect. P. 3, Caae kept the gatea of the graveyard throughont the day. Another aomepondaotwiitca; On being raiard to the auiface the coffin conveyed to a hearne and removed to the mortuary at the Cemetery, which ■Uuda on the range of hilla at the back the town, farming continuation of the famous St Boniface Down. It waa intended to examine the body in the mortuary, but thia was found be too confined for each operation, and it waa taken out and placed upon a bier in the Cemetery yard. The body waa removed out of the case in which it wax ocloeed within the oak coffin and examined in the open. The outer coffin waa eearovly aoiled, but the land coffin waa not air tight, aad in conaeqnaaoe the body waa greatly doootnpoeod. The examination laaud over two hocra, and waa not completed before darkaeva vet in. Photographs of the wounda in the head of tho deceaaed were in at vend upecta. 

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000170/18930909/015/0006
Isle of Wight Observer - Saturday 09 September 1893

THE MYSTERIOUS DEATH OF A VENTNOR GENTLEMAN. The connection of the unfortunate Lieutenant Hambrough with our own district gives a special local concern in what at present promises to be a mystery exceptionally difficult of solution. It is not our intention to offer any opinion as to the pre- cise cause which led to the young fellow's lament- able death ; and it is enough to point to the f aot that everyone is asking whether it was a caee of murder or of accidental homicide. At first there was no suspicion of foul play, and there was so much in the antecedents of the Lieutenant and his tutor, Mr Moneon, to suggest close intimacy, that no thought of anything bat mishap occurred to any one. On the previous day, indeed, the one man is said to have saved the other's life by fetching aid promptly when a boat accident had occurred. It is said that the boat struck on a rock and filled, and that Mr Monson swam to the shore and fetched the aid by means of which his companion was rescued. Despite the fact that they were both exhausted by this experience, particularly Lieut. Hambrough, the two men, and the vanished Mr Scott, were out shooting rabbits the next morning by 6 o'olock. That was the fatal morning ; and less than two hours afterwards the young Lieutenant was lying dead on the ground. The story first told was that as he was clambering through a hedge he managed to discharge the contents of his gun into his own skull, and thus to kill himself accidentally. This story was accepted, and the body of the unfortunate man was brought South and buried at Ventnor, amid the signs of the deepest mourning on the part of his "tutor," Mr Monson. How the feeling of dissatisfaction with the story of the death was started, and how it grew into a suspicion of foul play, is not stated ; but when once the suspicion had been formed it developed rapidly, until Mr Moneon was arrested, and the whole detective force in the country were scouting for the "Mr Scott." In the Isle of Wight, where the family of the de- ceased is bo well known, the interest has been painfully acute and strained, and the circum- stances of the exhumation of the body has added materially to the strength of the feeling. What light a further examination may throw upon the facts it is, of couse, impossible to say, and untii some authoritative statement in an official form is made known it will be well to attempt to form no hasty conclusions. It is easy enough to start a hundred theories, eaoh of which can find much in the roughly known facts to support it, but each only a contradiction of the others. The records of criminal cases show that there is no limit to tho ecccn'ricity of 00011% and there is nothing in any evidence which has yet transpired to ?? prove " cither the conclusion of guilt or that of innocence of tho persons now implicated ; but there are un- quebtionably, a vast variety of details, inferences from which may be drawn to bear out both. It is emphatically a very strange case, and tbe events which are made known from day to day only serve to heighten its extraordinary character. Among the most significant facts is that of the disap- pearance of the third person supposed to be present on the occasion, Mr. Scott. He is presumed to have come South with the body, and to have b«en present at the funeral in the Isle of Wight. He was, in fact in evidence so long as there was no suspicion of foul play. But he has vanished and it is cer- tainly strange that, despite the hue aud cry raised everywhere, he should not have come forward. This may, of course, be open to explanation. Men have disappeared before now and have been actually ignorant during the time of their absence that the whole country was eagerly seeking to find them. They have ro-appeared, and have then made all plain. Mr Scott may do this ; but his absence can- not fail to embarrass Mr Monson to a certain extent, and in the latter's interest the sooner Mr Scott is found the better. Meanwhile the mystery deepens. The remains of the late Lieutenant Windsor Cecil Dudley Hambrough, who was believed to have been accidentally shot at Ardlamont, Scotland, were exhumed in the churchyard of the parish church of St. Catherine's, Ventnor, on Monday afternoon, by order of the Home Secretary. Shortly after 4 o'clock, Mr J. G. McCulloch, of Inverary, Procurator Fiscal, and Mr McNaughton, Deputy- Procurator Fiscal of Argleshire. arrived with the authority of the Home Secretary. They were ac- companied by Dr. Littlejohn, of Edinburgh, and Dr. McMillan, the gentlemen who examined the body before burial, and were appointed to examine the remains on behalf of the Crown; and Dr. Sanders, of Edinburgh, who was present on behalf of the accused, Mr Monson. Dr. Whithead, of Ventnor, afterwards joined them in the interests of the Hambrough family. The body was encased in a massive oak coffin with silver mountings. On its removal from the grave, it was placed in a hearse and taken to the mortuary at Ventnor Ceme- tery, which is situated on the upper range of hills in line with St. Boniface Down. On the coffin lid being raised, it was found that rapid decomposition had set in, but the specially- appointed medical men were none the less able to make the necessary examination, the body being laid on oil sheets on the grass outside the mortuary, the public being vigorously excluded from the Cemetery. Photographs of the deceased's head were taken before and after the dissection, showing the nature and extent of the fatal wound. Several pellets were found in the head, and it was demon- strated that the shots entered the head from the back of the ear, a portion of which was carried away ; in fact, a later telegram from Ventnor says that Professor Littlejohn's investigation does not support the theory that Lieutenant Hambrough was shot accidentally; there was no singeing of the hair, nor was any trace of wadding found in the wound. Major Hambrough, who formally identified the coffin, was a distracted spectator of the whole proceedings. In tho course of conversa- tion, subsequently, Major Hambrough said it was a faot that his son's life had been insured in two sums of £10,000 each, and that both policies had been assigned to Mrs Monson, whose husband is in custody in connection with the case. Further particulars state that Mr Monson, when at Ventnor, was accompanied by a person who gave the name of Steven*. They occupied rooms at the Royal Marine Hotel, and an official there states that boou utter dinner on the fir.-t evening of their stay— AloiuUy. August 2 1st -Mr Monson seemed very daprwwed, and was very unwell, in consequence, he said, of worry through this sad accident, and of having entertained a lerge party at his castle in Scotland. So bad, indeed, did he become that it was found necessary to send for a local doctor, who prescribed for him, and next day he was much better On Tuesday evening he left the hotel, and proceeded to the station, where he met Lieutenant Ham- brough's fattier, and escorted him to the hotel where they both remained until after the funeral on Wednesday, when Mr Monson discharged the ac- count, and they left together. On the following Sunday a large number of people entered the church- yard to look at the grave. Though Mr Monson visited the Vicar (Rev. J. H. Shaw) at the time of the funeral, that gentleman was unaware of his iden- tity, but believed him to be the Scotch undertaker, The certificate of death was taken to the Vicar by Mr Monson, and Mr Houston, the clerk of the Ventnor Local Board, who was for a long time agent to the estate. Mr Shaw saw them in his study, and they handed him a certificate, signed by Alexander Steward, of Kilpinan ; it did not state any cause of death, that not being required. The explanation given to him of the accident was that the deceased stepped on some furze which concealed a drain. Every effort was made by Mr Monson to have the body interred in the family vault ; but there is a strong feeling in Ventnor against disturbing the bodies in vaults beneath the church ; consequently the Vicar declined to act without an order frem the Home Office, which did not arrive in time. Conse- quently the coffin was deposited in tho grave of an aunt, almost opposite the front entrance of the beautiful church, which the deceased gentleman's grandfather erected. At the graveside the Vicar noticed that Mr Monson was greatly affected, which, to use his own words, surprised him, for he had never seen an undertaker weep at a funeral before. The body was brought to Ventnor in charge of a gentleman believed to be the missing Mr. Scott. When asked how the accident occurred, this gentle- man said, " I was out with the party, but no one really knows how it happened." Mr Scott re- mained until after the funeral. Mrs Monson, the wife of the prisoner, is stated to be a youngish lady of prepossessing appearance, and is the daughter of Mr Fisher, a large and well-known colliery proprietor in the Barnsley district of York- shire. The publication of the fact in the newspapers that Scott is wanted has resulted in the officials at Inverary being literally deluged with telegrams re- garding the movements of men bearing a similar name. None of them, however, referred to the proper person. Moc6on has been committed for trial. 

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001960/18930916/102/0008
Isle of Wight County Press - Saturday 16 September 1893

VENTNOR

THE HAMBROUGH MYSTERY.

Further progress has been made this week by the Procurator-Fiscal in the work of precognoscing witnesses in connection with the mysterious death of Lieutenant Hambrough at Ardlamont on August 10. It is quite evident that the most stringent inquiry is being made. Almost every person the estate who was at the house, or near the offices, or who had any dealings with the shooting tenants has been examined. There are strange rumours abroad respecting the still missing Scott.

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000170/18930923/007/0005
Isle of Wight Observer - Saturday 23 September 1893

THE ARDLAMONT MYSTERY It is rumoured that Lieutenant Hambrough, who was shot at Ardlamont, has left a will, which it is expected will be put in at the trial. A London contemporary says:— Major Ham- brough' s belief that Monson exercised an hypnotic influence over his son may seem at first sight incredible and insufficient to account for the sudden but continuous change of manner which the deceased evinced towards his father and mother after he had been committed to Monson's care. When compared with a ease we know something of the idea does not seem so impossible. A few years ago an officer in the army exercised a hypnotic power over a young man of his acquaietance staying in the same town where he was quartered. Wherever the officer went the youth followed him— in fact, so great was the man's influence over the boy that it was gener- ally remarked upon in the neighbourhood. While continually expressing a wish to go np to London he was apparently quite unable to do so. On several occasions he even went so far as to go to the station and take his ticket. Meeting an old friend one day on the platform, he announced his intention of travelling up with him, but as the train came into the station he turned round and walked away, saying " I can't go up to-day." The scene of the Ardlamont tragedy was put up for sale yesterday at Edinburgh. Tho estate ex- tends to 1 1,000 acres, with a rental of £3,720. The upset price was £80,000. No offer was made, and the sale was adjourned. The Hambrough family, now promiently before the public, bears one of the oldest names in the Isle of Wight. They are the ground landlords of Ventnor, whioh is built on their property. The rent roll is said to be some £7000 a year, and the ground of Steephill Castle, the family seat, are amongst the most extensive in the district. The unfortunate victim of the Ardlamont tragedy would have become heir by his grandfather's will to this property, together with the London estate and the estate of Pitwell Hall. Colonel Hambrough him- solf resides principally at Houghton, Stockbridge. He is the patron of two livings in Hants . The Editor of the Medical Annual speaks in the highest terms of Cadbuby's Cocoa as a beverage and a food for invalids on account of its absolute purity, high quality, and great solubility ; and counsels the Medical Profession to remember, in recommending Cocoa, that the name CaSBTOY en any packet is a guarantee of purity. 


https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000170/18930930/022/0006
Isle of Wight Observer - Saturday 30 September 1893

THE ARDLAMONT MYSIERY A Witness Intebvibwed. Mr J. Dunn, a Kewcaatle jeweller, who has been spending the summer in Scotland, was interviewed on Tuesday evening by the iilairgowiie correspon- dent of the Central News. He appeared greatly upset at being by accident brought into the position of practically the chief witness in so painful a case. Amongst the places he stayed at during the summer was a cottage close to the road leading to Ardlamont, and the room which he occupied afforded views to the north and south of the public road. On the morning of August 10th Mr Dunn said ne was looking to the south, when he observed Lieutenant Hambrough, Mr Monson, and the man Scott walk- ing along the public road towards the cottage. Tnere was, however, nothing in their appearance or manner to notice particularly. TheLieutenaut and Monson each carried a gun, but the third man had no weapon. At a certain point of the road Mr Dunn lost sight of the party, but they again came into view fcom the other window. He could not understand, he said, why he took such notice of the party, but as a matter of fact he set himself to watch their movements. The three men jumped the fence skirting the public road, and went together until about half way to the wood. There they separated, Lieutenant Hambrough going almost straight ahead, and Monson and Scott proceeded in an oblique direction to the left. Their courses were respectively followed until he lost sight of them in the wood. Shortly afterwards Mr. Dunn heard the report of a gun from the direction of the wood, but he paid little attention to this, fancying that the party had found sport. He was astounded when not long afterwards he learnt that Lieutenant Hambrough was dead, and he visited the spot where the body was found. Questioned as to whether there was any probability or chance of the parties converging by the time he heard the gun fired, Mr. Dunn declined to offer an opinion. He preferred to leave that problem for others to solve. A simple statement of facts which came under his observa- tion was all that he was accountable for, and all that he should give to anyone anywhere. 

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001960/18931007/076/0005
Isle of Wight County Press - Saturday 07 October 1893

THE "HAMBROUGH" MYSTERY.—ANOTHER DEVELOPMENT.

The latest development from Ardlamont is the discovery, on the top of the dyke in the wood where Lieut. Hambrough was shot, of a piece of the unfortunate young officer's skull, with three pellet marks in it. The position in which the piece of bone was found is regarded as strong evidence that Lieut. Hambrough was shot while in an exposed position, and not while at the bottom of the ditch, as was suggested. The discovery will probably have important bearing on the case when the trial comes on.

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001960/18931007/115/0007
Isle of Wight County Press - Saturday 07 October 1893

VENTNOR (HOLY TRINITY).

The annual harvest festival and children's thanksgiving service was held at Holy Trinity Church on Sunday, when the interior of the edifice was, as usual, very tastefully decorated. ... The Hambrough memorial window, an object of sorrowful interest in the light of recent events, was adorned with fruit and flowers of various kinds. ...

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001960/18931014/082/0005
Isle of Wight County Press - Saturday 14 October 1893

“HAMBROUGH" TRAGEDY.

ANOTHER REPORTED EXHUMATION.

A Glasgow correspondent states that the two pieces of bone which were found close to the scene of the Ardlamont tragedy were sent to the Crown authorities at Edinburgh, and have become an important link in the chain of evidence. The correspondent states that there has been another exhumation of the body and that the skull has been removed from the grave at Ventnor, and during the last few days has been submitted to the most minute examination by the Professor of Anatomy in Edinburgh University. Two small bits of bone, each about the size of a thumb-nail, have been pieced on the part of the skull which received the full force of the shot. The discovery of the bone will be a material point the case, bearing on the question whether the pieces were shot away by a gun close to the head or at a distance. Casts of the skull have also been taken, and will be produced at the trial.

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001960/18931021/164/0008
Isle of Wight County Press - Saturday 21 October 1893

THE “HAMBROUGH” TRAGEDY.

In our last Saturday's issue it was stated, on the authority of a Glasgow correspondent, that there had been another exhumation of the body of Lieut. Hambrough at Ventnor, and that the skull had been removed to Edinburgh. This has been disputed, and it would appear that thw statement was not wholly accurate. "It is doubtless perfectly true," says a correspondent, "that the grave at Ventnor has not been disturbed a second time, but notwithstanding all denials the skull of Lieut. Hambrough is in Edinburgh. The head was parted from the body when first exhumed at Ventnor, and was carried down to Scotland by the Procurator-Fiscal. It will be one of the productions of the Crown at the trial. There has been no new opening of the grave since, because, of course, that was unnecessary.

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001960/18931216/093/0008
Isle of Wight County Press - Saturday 16 December 1893

THE ALLEGED MUEDER OF LIEUT. HAMBEOUGH. TRIAL OF MONSON AT The trial of Alfred John Monson, charged—along with Edward Scott, who has eluded arrest—with the murder and also with the attempted murder of Lieut. Windsor Cecil Hambrough Ardlsmoat, Argylesbire, in Angust, began on Tuesday at tha High Court of Justiciary, in burgh, before Lord Kingeburgh, Lord Justice Clerk. The proceedings opened with the calling of the accused Scott, aid, did not appear, application was made for his outlawry. Ovsr 100 witness** are cited for tha prosaention. Thu Solicitor-General lor Scotland, Mr. Asher, Q. 0., M.P., conduct* the case for the Crown. With has are Mr. J. A. Reid, Hr. J. C. Lonmer, and Mr. R. U. Straehaa (advocates-depute), and Mr. J. Baxter (assistant-advocate depute). The prisoner was represented by Sheriff Onmrie Thomson, Ml. John Wilson, and Ur. W. Findlay (advocates), Mr. Haloolm (adroeataL appeared to watch tha osa* behalf of Major Hambrough, of Stsephill Castle, LW., father of the dtoeaaed. The Judge haring asked Monson if adhered to his plea of “Not guilty,* tendered at tbs former silting of the Court, the prisoner replied, “Ido, lord, and jury of IS was than balloted and swam. After two jurymen bad been challenged, the indictment was mad by the Clerk. The first witness called was Mr. James Brand, C.E., Glasgow, who produced plana of tb* scene of tbs fatality. H* admitted in cross-examination that tha accuracy of hia productions depended on the oorreolDess the information given him. James Wright, bn tier at Ardlamont House, deposed that was treated a* one of the boose party. On August 9th, altar dinner, was told to wait up for the gentlemen, aa they were going out fishing. In the night one of them, be thought it was Hambrough, cams back for lamp. He said the boat had sunk and they had swum ashore. Half an hour afterwards he heard them in the smoking-room. went to Monson’• and Hambrough's rooms and found their clothes wringing wet. went to bad 2, leaving them in tb* smoking-room. When got up at 7, the gentlemen were up before him. abontfibesaw Moaicn and SnM, and told him Hambrough had shot??? himself and was quite dead. He said the body was just in the wood. Witness went into the shrubbery, but could not find it. Mims no took him to it. It was lying on the wall by the aids of the ditch. Tha body was taken into the botwe, sad witness advised that doctor should be sent for. Monson and Soott wars sticking together all the morning. Witness asked Soott if oonld not wait till tha inquiry was over, hot he said hit htminma took him a way. : All the puty amned on fooi term*. Archibald Whyte, gardener at care eetdenoe a* to the removal of the body, •ajinff there wee |tna near, and ha could no blood except under the head. Then not the elighteet appearance in the ditch at any weighty body having fallen into it. He found two small pieces of bone 6in. and pin. away from the head. Thaaa ha buried. From 15 to 17 paeaa from the body then wen two trail*. Examined aa to the boat, aaid the bole waa too lane for plug-hole, and named to have been out with knife. When waa looking at the boat, Monson came tad said it was upset. He said the purchase of the estate by Hambrough had all been settled, except that they wen to see Major Hambrough. Then was no appearance in the ditch as if the had been trodden down by people in lifting the body.—In cross-examination witness admitted telling the Procurator-Fiscal saw no tracks in the great, which was a lie. Stuart M'Nicol, aetata joiner at Ardlament, aaid Monaoo borrowed hi* boat, which bad cork plughole in the atern. He afterward* found bole in it, which termed have been made with knife. found claap-knife on the above. Thia witoeaa alao corroborated as to the condition of the apoton which the body waa found and of the ditch. Htgrb Carmichael, ploughman, aaw Hanson going towards the house on the day of the death, carrying two guns. John Steven, factor cat the Ardlamont estate, found Hontoo and Scott in the smoking-room after the body of Hambrough had been taken home; Witness aaid Thia it terrible job,” and Scott aaid it waa; did not think Monaco spoke. Scott told him he did not have gun, he wsa oarryiiw the rabbits. Mo neon afterwards said Hambrough waa on wall, Soott in tbe middle, and parallel with the road. heard the shot and went on to tbe end of the wood, and there cried Hallo, Hambrough, where are yon? What have yon got Mot getting any answer be went along the dyke where Hambrough should have been, and waa horrified to find the body. He pointed to two places, and after that aaid “To tell you the truth. Hr. Steven, I don’t know where we lifted him from.” Witness aaw no appearance or mark of man having fallen at either place. A* to the banting accident, Monson aaid tbe hunt struck rock. Hambrough could not swim but Monson was good swimmer. 

WEDNESDAY. the opening the court on Wed Deader, the examination of the witneee Steven the Solicitor* General raeumed. He described going after luncheon with Ucaaon end Dr. MeeniiTlen to aae where the body wee found. Uonaon wee excited. He eccompenied Mon ion to Ventoor with the body ebout week after, when Uonaon wee under police aurveillence. He told witneee be bed gone to the keeper’s for 20-bore gun which Hembtough was in the Debit of uaing. When he got beck found Soott end Hembroogh gone, the letter with hia (Uooaon’a) gun, 12-bore.—Cratn-exemiiied: Uonaon borrowed iTNiool’e boat because another which bed wee not Bale. When be looped down to lift Hembcongh’s body, noticed very atroog amell of whiskey. Uonaon looked as if be were crying when the body wea taken to the bouse. He could detect no smell of singeing. He formed the opinion that the shot moat have been fired within the distance of the length the barrel, or it would have been more scattered. The doctor woke of the shot baring nearly.missed. An inch or half inch Isas, and it would not have been fatU. When Scott was about to be taken by the doctor into another room Uonaon said it was pity Scott could not wait. said that in England there would be an inquest. The doctor said they were particular there, too, but be was confident his report would satisfy the author! tiea. One required to be careful when walking on the wall, especially when carrying gun. On a wet morning it would be more difficult. There was bole on the top of the dyke into which man's foot might very well drop. That was near the body. Uoosou seemed dated and shocked at what had happened. James Dunn, watchmaker, who was at Ant lament oo holiday, taw Uoneon, Uambrough, and third man together. Hambroogb weet to the right and the others to tbs left. Alter they had passed out of sight beard shot.—Cross-examined : If the men had continued in the direction in which they were going, they could not have met, George Lamoot, gamekeeper, said the plug-hole was not in the usual plaoe.—Cross-examined : Mooton informed him that Uambrough told him that had cot hole with hit knife in U'Kellar'a boat and plugged it. Hamhrough’s gun had had its stock broken by falling on rooks while out shooting. Witness was accustomed to relieve Hambrough of his gun when crossing ditch. After Hambroogb’s death Uonaon was terribly excited and distressed. Uoneon explained that Hambrough was that day trying an amberite cartridge in the 12-bore gun.— Re-examined: U'Kellar’a boat did not need plughole. John Douglas. gamskMptr, bad never beard of rocks in Ardlamont Bay on which a boat miffht strike. Dugald M'KrlUr apoke to lending a boat to Hambrough. It had no marks of damage the rocks.— Cross-examined : A boat might bump on a rook sufficiently to throw a msn oot who was standing in it and yet get no damage. Alexandrine Shand, Ardlamont, having given evidence, John Tweedie, herring boyer, stated that be heard two screams apparently from the north point of the bay on August 9th.—Cross-examined : The scresms did not indicate that it was from any one in distress. The rocks on both sides of where the boats lay made the place dangerous. Peter Galbraith, fisherman, spoke to the absence of rooks in the bay. James M'Pbee. “boots” at Tighnabruaich Hotel, said Scott arrived tar steamer on August Bth. When Monson met them Scott seemed annoyed. When he left Ardlamont be seemed nervous man. Hugh Carmichael, groom, said Monson was mostly crying after the accident. James Donald, who spoke to the proposed purchase of yacht by Monson and Hsmbrough, said, in cross-examination, that the latter told him he had very narrow escape when out shooting, the charge going put his head. Jessie M'Leod, housekeeper, said Soott was treated as ordinary gentleman. Uambrongh and Monson were on friendly terms. Samuel James Porter, photographer, Ventnor, said that in October last, at the request of the Procurator- Fiaoal of Argyleehite, made certain photographs of skull. These photographs were produced. After some other evidence, Hugh Jeffrey, curator of the Ventnor Cemetery, was called and said he was present when tbe body Hambroogb was disinterred on September *th. saw Monson in tbe Cemetery on August 16th, the 

day before the foners! took place, and had conversation with him. Witness said. “ What sad affair it was.” Monson said. It was.” Witness then aaked how it happened, and Monson said, were going out shooting with fellow officer and got to the ground about boor beforehand. Mr. Hambrough in getting over 4ft, wall either struck bis gun or fall with hit head it It went off and Maw out his brains. The whole thing was dons in instant* Monson said Hr. Hambrough was Maying with him the time.-Cross-examined: No one else was present when this conversation took place. Monson gave it off ia tbs same rapid way witness had done. Witness had not read very many newspaper paragraphs abmt this case. Be did not take daily paper. He got lAomtt WteUf, hot not always. Monson had said that fellow-offioem war* going down shoot bat witness did no* merely that it was they who were with Hambrough. said, “ were going out lor day’s shooting with hia fellow-officers. He had not saea anything about that in tbo nawapapate. Farther evidence followed, including that of Jama* MaoNaagbtoa, gun-maker, Edinburgh, who detailed experiments be had loading him to the oooclunon that tha fatal shot* wen find from distance of 9ft. from the deceased’s head. B* oonld not see any possibility of the wooed* having been asM-inflieted, accidentally or othorwiar. The two track* asms alongside the place from which it appealed to him tho •hot had born fired.

THURSDAY.

In cross-examination, on Thursday morning, Mr. HneNangfaton said hia theory was that HamDrangh was standing erect. If be wen stooping, stumbling, or inclining his head, the conclusion* would horn to modified. Under the direction of doctors he find three corpses in the city mortuary at Edinburgh, but did not look at tb* result tha sbo«t —Mr. Oamria Thomson: Ido not wowdar; if was ghastly job. Dr. Henry Doncaa Littlejohn, lecturer on medical juris prudence and medical officer of health, Edinburgh, said by instraotion of tbo Crown be attended tha exhumation of the body of the dtoeaaed. Lieutenant Hambrough. Vcntnor on September 4. The Deputy Procurator-Fiscal Argylsohin and Dr. Macmillan, Tighnabruaich, wen also present, and Dr. Saunderson, limn Edinburgh, attended npwaantarivn of the accused. The report the seif marins examination was than handed in. It stated that tha deceased died from shook, the mult of gunshot jury of the skull and brain, and subsequent lose blood. It. was signed by Dr. Littlejohn and Dr. Macmillan. The witness iiiiaumad tha opinion that the direction of the wound was from behind forwards. He thought it impossible that the injuries could ban been caused accidentally by the deceased. Would hare expected deceased to have fallen ia heap when shot, bat then might hsv* been automatic or caovnlsiv* movements of the limb* to alter position of the limbs; there would be no spring forward. The conclusion aa to the cause of death depended very much upon whether it was true that the place pointed out at that where deceased fall was realty the plsoe where was Shot,—Ba-examined: The finding of pieces of bone would settle the question a* to when be was shot. The track of the body, if I if tad, would bare been well marked with Mood. Dr. John Macmillan gave Mnneon’s account of tha affair. Ha stated that he waa SO yards off when ba hoard the shot. said that the sight before be and Hambrough had gone out fishing, and tho ping went out of the boat when they were mils from shore. Acting on the statements of Monson and Soott, witness certified that the death waa due to accident, bat hia final opinion after the accident waa that it oonld not have been so. Dr. Macdonald Brown and Dr. Patrick Heron Watson also gave evidence, the latter giving it aa hi* judgment that death was the result of a shot find by other man about off. Or. Joseph Bell gars similar evidence, and added that ba boo Id imagine perfectly hone** and »tent person Boding modus by which this might bare been accidental John Graham M’Leaa deposed as Hambrough signing two proposals of insurance hia life in toe Mutual Life Insurance Company of New York, to be contained in two policies of £lO,OOO. Monacn paid the premium with a cheque signed by hi* wife. Monson said wss trustee and guardian of deessaed, who was coming into fortune of £200,000, and was about to pnrobaaa tha Ardlsmoat Estate, of the purchase price of which Mia. Monson was going to adraooe £20,000. Latter* were pot ia syted by deceased, assigning the policies to Mrs. Monson.


https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001960/18931223/101/0008
Isle of Wight County Press - Saturday 23 December 1893

Thtcogn ho«* the inynptwn. Q*or^» po—e—ion obildML 20 last Maj. 1B8& vHaaa> found hi* affair* baeomiag aafaanaaaed, and in 1886 h« granted mortgafa the K«gU Inaaraaoa Ooaapur, tad the intrraat (all into arraar, the mortgage baiog foraoloaad about February, 1881. Ut* intanat in Pipavall deprnded hi* Oacar, who wa* 58 yaata. ago, widower with no family. In the of 1888, witnam had tranaaotiona with Tottenham, who made bint weakly allowance. Tottenham iatrodnead him Monson in May or June, 188 a Ho undaratood to ha an army tutor, and the introduction waa with the view of hia training hi* eon for the army, payment to mad* whan tag financial affair* af the witaeaa ware arranged. attempt wa* to be mad* to get the aetata* from the Koala and tranafar them ao aa to reduce the interact. Tottanbam failed, and Monson waa to try to carry out the arrangement At the beginning of 1882 terminated the arrangement with Monaco and pot hi* affair* in the hand* of Mr. roller, colioitor. He diaplaerd Monson beoana* had teaaoo to diatraat him. Witness also eadearoared to hare hi* boy remored, hot found Monsont inioane* operated agaioat hi* adriee, Mr. Fnller, with the approral of winess, tried get hi* non away from Monson. During the time Monson wa* endeavoring to arrange his affairs witness granted three documents to him. He then had oonidenoe in Monson. The diet was, thought, bill for £5000, aigaed by Monson and witness in May, 1801; the second mortgage of September, 1881, for, he thought, £3000, signed witness only. Monson said the first was for too large aa amount and he could do nothing with it. Witness understood it had not bean negotiated, but he did not reosir* it back. The third document was mortgage far £2600 granted in the same month. Monson aid not explain why this was required, and witess signed it because he was asked to. Three were all the documents granted to Monson to the best of his recollection. He got small sums from Monson. in all under £200. He did not recollect giving the mortgage (prodneed) for £5000, and the signature to second mortgage fur similar amount waa not hi*. The signature of his eon in full he could not recognise, but he wa* of opinion it was not his >oo’* signature. Coming to hi* con's death, witness said that when ha arrived Ardlamont said be was out for walk before breakfast in the meadowa when heard shot fired. Witness endemtood that Cecil waa the on* who had gun. Witness asked to Scott, hot Monson said sen affected that ha oonld not resnsin and bad returned to Glasgow. At. Veotnor, where the funeral took plan, Monson told witness then would has* been policy for £50,000 carried cot with the Scottish Providnt Institution if bis son had lisad. H* aaid nothing about two polioses for £lO,OOO, each having boon carried oat few day* before the dnth. H* said there wn small policy fee held by Mr*. Moneon, but tbe preminm bad ao* been paid. —la the course bis cross wremleerion (which included the rending counsel of various letters from Cecil Hambrough expressing oonfidnee in the Monson*) witnaas said that after the death of hia son wirad from Glasgow Menace for money to enable him to go to Ardlamont. Monson sent it, and gave him £10 at Ardlamont, and paid the general expenses, he supposed, and his railway fare back to London wall a* bit hotel bills Ventnor. Witness told him to tend the account to Mr. Prince. Mr. Prince had no money his actually in hand. When he get to be was greatly distressed, but his memory was clear. On Monday further evidence as to insurance policies and the financial position of the parties was given, and on Tuesday the most interesting witness called was the brother of the accused Scott or Davit, who gave his name  ??? George Sweeney. He said hia, brother Edward was years of age, of Tory this build, and wsa consumptive. Witness gave information to the police officisle about hia brother's whereabouts, because ha did not know if he ??had not known si oca the middle of September. His family thought he had gone to Australia, but was not sure. He had not written all; the only explanation witness could give of this (net was that his brother waa extremely ill. His brother had not been in Scotland to his knowledge this year.—After the hearing of other evidence the case for the Crown concluded, and the first witnesses were called for the defence on Tu«d»y. On WfdMndsy Dr. Hnr. Profeanor of Uedionl Jurisprudenoe in Abardran Unirentty, axiiraned hii belief, M tha raaolt of inTfat»»atioc»an<lexperiman>«, that tha injury to tha band of JUaot. Hambrouarb which canard death could hare barn accidental J inflicted byagun in the band of tha daceaaed himaal , that tha abot could not have been discharged a* greater distance than four feet, and that certain pallet narka the rowan tree and othar trees in immediate vicinity of the place where the death took place were at least two three montha old when riaitad the a pot September 14. Dr. Bandera, Edinburgh, concurred with Prof near Hayhevidraea. —Monson'a govern pea aaid that hermaatarand Lieut. Hambrough ware always on tha beat of terma, and Tom Speedy, factor neighbouring estate, thought it waa quite peaetbla that Cecil Hambrough might have fallen and perhapa thrown the gun from him, w he believed the late Lord Dalkeith did. The gun mightaaaily bareeaagfat in tha brnah. Hehadaacertainad from experimanta had made that amberite powder fired from abort distance would not hair. —Edward Lauag, gunmaker, of Pall Mall, aaid that in April Lieut. Hambrough ordered pair of leas guns from him. Whilst there he took np maifle and mapped it right in line witness's foremadHad when Hambrough left tha chop witneae exclaimed, Did you aver see fellow handle gun in aoofa way before? will either himaelf or some of his friends." Thursday the eridence for the defence was oiossd, and the Solieitoc-General, in n speech of six boors’ duration, addressed the jury for the prosecution. He renewed the history of the case, oootending that the theory of accident was altogether untenable in regard both. Yesterday (Friday), in an eloquent speech for tbo defence, Mr. Comrie Thomson contended that there wee an otter absence of mo tire for the crime on Honeon’e part, and if had wished to morder Hembtoagn it wee preposterous to imagine that he should bring third party to witness the deed. Ha regarded the failure Soott to appear the greatest calamily for hie client that erer befel mortal men. He claimed much consideration for the amdical for the defence re was giran to that for the proaeontion, and said if the jury bad any doubt hie client was entitled to the benefit of it. Last night the jrgrapbed The Ardlamont trial concluded quarter to S, when the lory, after 45 minutes’ delibrrmtion, returned serdict of Not proven.” When the Jury returned into Court with this loud cheers wars raised end wars repeated by an immense crowd which bad oollceted outside the Court house. Monann was at released and rroeired the ooogratulatiow of his friends. The Jndgs’e summing up was greatly in favour tbs pneoacr. * Speaking of the valns of trade advertisement, an authority says; “It travels in all direotfore at once. It visits your wietimiwn with periodical regularity It interests them your town and it buildiim up the general prosperity, while it is faithfully transacting your particular fauaiaem. It talks with thnueandeof tregasa, aad has the onnfidrere its hearers.”


https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001960/18931230/105/0007
Isle of Wight County Press - Saturday 30 December 1893

DECEMBER

12. Trial of Alfred John Monson, charged with the murder at Ardlamont, in August, of Lieut. Hambrough, of Steephill Castle, Ventnor, commenced at Edinburgh.

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/BL/0000170/18931230/004/0004?browse=true
Isle of Wight Observer - Saturday 30 December 1893

THE ARDLAMONT MYSTERY Major Hambrough and his family were at one time very well known ia the Isle of Wight. Their residence at Steephill Castle, Ventnor, aud the active part which the Major took in local social functions, as well as his liberality and hospitality, all tended to make him a pronineut and popular figure, in the southern part of the Island especially. But, after a time, it began to be rumoured that hospitality and liberality had been carried too far, and the family left the Island to reside el. e where. The son, Cecil Hambrough, was a young fellow who, though a mere lad when the family left Vent- nor, had made many ties there. It was generally understood he was intended for the Army. When, therefore, the news reached Ventnor that he had shot himself while out shooting in Scotland, great interest and concern were manifested, which cul- minated in intense excitement wheu the body, which had been interred at Ventnor, was exhumed for examination, and when the news came that Monson, the Army tutor, with whom Cecil had been living, had been arrested on suspicion of being concernedin the poor young fellow's death. The trial, at which the case has been sifted, terminated last Friday, and the avidity with which every detail has been followed, renders it unnecessary to reproduce the evidence. The trial ended, as most of those who followed it thought it would end, in a verdict of " Not proven," which the Scotch Law enables a jury to return. Deeply involved, as the Ham. broughs were known to be, few in the Island were prepared for such a history of shifty schemes to raise money and educate young Cecil as were revealed at the trial. It appeared that Major Hambrough, having mortgaged his life interest in the family estates to the Eagle Insurance Office, was unable to pay the interest, and the office fore- closed. A financial agent in London, by the name of Tottenham, who had formerly been an officer in the Hussars, very kindly tried to help ths Ham- broughs. His efforts were, however, of no avail and in 1890 he introduced Major Hambrough to any Army tutor, named Monson, who undertook to prepare Cecil for the Army. He took youn? Ham- brough to live with him, first at Risely Hall, in Yorkshire, and afterwards to a house iv Ardlamont Scotland, to which Monson moved at Whitsuntide 1893. Monson must have possessed great capacity for impressing people with his bonajidss, for, not- withstanding the fact that he had been made a bankrupt, that his wife's estate was heavily mort- gaged, and that he himself (as revealed by the evi- dence at the trial) was in such a state of impecunio- sity that both he and his wife had to pledge their jewellery and other articles, he yet managed to obtain a year's lease of a house at the large rent of £450 a year! It is not surprising a gentleman, possessed of such financial ability as this, should endeavour to raise money for the Hambrough's and himself, the security being young Ham- brough's prospective interests under the will of a relative. For days the Scotch Jury heard nothing but details of the efforts of Monson not only to secure this end, but to insure the lad's life for very large sums. Finally, the Mutual Insur- ance Company, New York, issued two temporary policies of £10,000 each, available for 60 days, with with the assignment of these by young Ham- borough to Mrs Monson. On August 9th, 1893 singular to relate, young Hambrough met with a boating accident in Ardlamont Bay, the plug 0 f the boat in which he and Monson were rowing hav- ing come out, aud the boat having filled. Cecil escaped from that contretemps, but on the morning of the following day he died from the effects of a gunshot wound received in a wood at Ardlamont. Who inflicted that wound ? The case for the Crown was that Monson had killed Hamborough. fa. order to obtain the insurance money, and there \» certainly considerable roo n for suspicion. A impecunious and (as shown by the e.idonc*) no t altogether scrupulous man, having £20,00. on th death of the young fellow, might ?? J his death. In reality, however, the dead man had not made such an assignment of the policies, on h ' life, as would have any legal effect in enabho Monson to obtain the money. The whole kernell J the case rested on the question— Did Monson lei °' this ? Did he think he was going to get the- *tf ° W or part of the money? For the defence,, w '° le ' pleaded that Monson was thoroughly awaiip W * B the whole of the assignments were value W ' at that being the case he hid no motive ioa * 8 ' * Q< * sing Hambrough's death, but far greats- com PaB- -in keeping the young man alive. Aasuna; ln *f re st bo true, the wtwie case falls to- tha ■ ° g , Bto other respects the caso was exceedingly weak against Mouson, resting, as it did, entirely upon cir. cumstantial ovioeuce. it waa not impossible that young Hambrough might have accidently killed himself, although the Crown experts did not con. aider it by any means prubaMe. But there was evidence to prove that young Hambrough was careless with his gun, aud it was also shown that similar accidents had occurred. It is not surpris- ing, therefore, that the Jury, seeing the many g ap 9 in the evideuce, took refuge iv their national ver- dict of "Not Proven." That there were mauy dark points in the ca_w was undoubted. Th* cvi. dence about tho guru — the condition of the dead man's skull —the position of the body — the marks on the trees— and the strange disappearance of a man by the name of Scott, who was staying with Mouson at Ardlamont — all combined to intensify suspicion, and to deep.v public interest in a case which remains full of mystory still, a light only being thrown upou thy mum _ in which sitae pre- teutious but ingenious persons manage to overcome the disadvantages of impecuniosity.


https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001960/18940106/063/0004
Isle of Wight County Press - Saturday 06 January 1894

THE ARDLAMONT MYSTERY.

The Press Association understands that several matters in dispute between perrons connected with the trial will sooner or later occupy the attention of the English Courts. There are cross actions pending between Mr. Tottenham and Major Hambmugh in respect to financial transactions, and in another case Major Hambrough will be the defendant in a suit to be brought by the Mercantile Bank (Limited). It is expected that this case will come on for hearing at the end of the present month.

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001960/18940113/100/0005
Isle of Wight County Press - Saturday 13 January 1894

THE MYSTERY OP ARDLAMONT.

Rumour continues to busy itself about the Hambrough case. It is now stated that Mr. Monson promises to publish in a few days a perfect solution of the great mystery, as well as the true facts about Scott. Mr. Monson believes, we are further told, that his book will "create considerable excitement and alarm in the public mind respecting the methods and procedure adopted against an innocent and helpless man." It is also stated that Mr. Monson has received a letter purporting to come from Scott, in which the writer says he intends to give himself up, and that he is going to forward his diary so that it may be included in Mr. Monson’s book.

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001960/18940303/059/0005
Isle of Wight County Press - Saturday 03 March 1894

THE LATE LIEUT. HAMBROUGH'S ESTATE.

Letters of administmtion of the personal estate and effects, valued at £19,734 5s. net and £20,050 groee, of Windsor Dudley Cecil Hambrough, late of Swansea Villa, Station-road, Bexhill on-Sea, Sussex, lieutenant 3rd York Militia, who died on the 10th of August, 1893, at Ardlamont, Argyleshire, a bachelor and intestate, have been granted to his father and next-of-kin, Dudley Albert Hambrough, of 68, Edith-raod, Weat Kensington, whose sureties, in the sum of £40,000, are Henry Albert Reeves, of 7, Grosvenor-street, and William Godfrey Hambledon, of 28, York-street, Middlesex, physician.

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001960/18950126/121/0008
Isle of Wight County Press - Saturday 26 January 1895

THE HAMBROUGH APPEAL

Major Hambrough's appeal against the judgement invalidating the policy of insurance on his son's life was before the Court of Appeal yesterday. The appeal was dismissed.


https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001960/18950406/104/0005
Isle of Wight County Press - Saturday 06 April 1895

THE AFFAIRS OF MAJOR HAMBROUGH.

Major Hambrough came up for public examination at the London Bankruptcy Court on Thursday. The statement of affairs showed gross liabilities of £12,533, of which £6979 is unsecured, and assets £12,946. In examination by the Official Receiver, the Debtor stated that the only asset was an interest in certain policies on his late son’s life. That interest had been decided against him and now he had no assets whatever. His sole expectation of paying his debts was by arranging with his son when he came of age to cut off the entail. He was not now in possession of the estate, the mortgagees having foreclosed. —The examination was concluded.


TO DO: Entail in law eg https://englishhistoryauthors.blogspot.com/2020/05/entailment-in-english-inheritance-laws.html