# John Wilkes


https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001960/18851010/015/0002
Isle of Wight County Press - Saturday 10 October 1885

SANDOWN AND JOHN WILKES.

*To the Editor of the Isle of Wight County Press.*

Sir,—One of the charms of the Isle of Wight consists in the circumstance that within its contracted compass are found towns and villages, both old and new. In the very heart of the Island is the historic village of Carisbrooke, the former capital of the Island, with its written annals going so far back as the Venerable Bede and the Saxon Chronicle, where its name is mentioned, A.D. 530, and with its unwritten evidence of the more ancient occupation of the Romans stamped upon its still existing well-preserved "villa." At the back of the Island is the new, bright, cheerful, watering-place of Sandown. Rarely have we the opportunity of seeing the birth of a town; a town may extend in length, or breadth, or it may become the recipient of new municipal or electoral privileges, but there are few cases where we can assert that people still living saw the town start into being. Such is the case of Sandown. Canon Venables, in his guide, p. 161, has observed, "If the tourist examines the 'Ordnance Map' (dated 1810) he will observe no such place as 'Sandown' marked upon it. "Sandham Fort," "Sandham Cottage" (Wilkes's Villakin), and the barracks, are the only buildings indicated, while the site of the present town appears under the designation of "Royal Heath," then a common, as rough and uncultivated as "Pan Common" is now, overgrown with gorse, and feuding a few sheep on its scanty herbage." Even so lately as the date of Mr. James Thorne's publication ("The Land we Live in," vol. ii, p. 264) Sandown is described as a "little village, in which a neat church has been recently erected." "A few fishermen's huts," adds Thorne, "and humble cottages are dropped here and there along the cliffs, and two or three boats may generally be seen hauled on the beach. In the early morning, when the cliff's lie in deep shadow, or about sunset, when their sombre tints deepen into a richer hue, while two or three shrimpers are plying their craft, or a way-farer is wending along the sands to or from his day's labour, the scene has a quiet beauty that reminds one of the charming pictures which Collins used to paint so delightfully; not a few indeed of his paintings were taken from sketches made in this neighbourhood." All this has changed since the time when Collins painted his earlier pictures (1814-1836), and Sandown takes its place, if not with Newport and Ryde, yet with Cowes, Ventnor, and Shanklin, with its governing Board and powers Hof self-taxation for local purposes.

John Wilkes, of "'45" notoriety, has been called the "discoverer" of this place. I have a faint kind of personal interest in that disreputable adventurer, since I remember my father saying, that when Wilkes was colonel of the Buckinghamshire Militia, and member for Aylesbury, my great grandfather was one of Wilkes's most staunch supporters, mad that my grandmother, when a little girl, had often been seated on his knee, not terrified by the ugly face of that demagogue, which, with its frightful squint and hideous leer, William Hogarth has stamped, as it were upon adamant, in his well-known portrait of Wilkes sitting in a chair with the cap of liberty on a pole. Wilkes and the Wilkite riots take up many pages in the dreary history of the middle of the eighteenth century, filled up with the factious struggles between place-holders and place-hunters. Worthless in himself, pert, yet feeble as a Parliamentary speaker, he was permitted by Providence to appear and flourish for a season, in order that certain political principles of great worth and importance should be developed and grounded in the British constitution. Neither his character nor his abilities would have raised him to political eminence, but the illegal and impolitic measures of his opponents made him the popular idol. The most creditable part of his career was connected with his residence in the Isle of Wight during his latter years. The earlier and unsavoury history of his public life, except so far as it points a moral, may be dismissed in a few words.

TO DO

His father, a wealthy distiller, Trsut.c•nut.rting bait, with trains run betwisli Lyniingtpti Br • Tile.- steantiqs will talie up Foo.rugers for Rydr, Cowes, and tiptizi,tinipton on entering the Harbour, and not ou Ir.triug. His father, a wealthy distiller, with strong Puutan leanings, gave him a liberal education; as u Nonconformist, he would not send his son to Oxford or Cambridge, but allowed him to study at the Dutch University of Leyden. Like another Buckingham member of Parliament. Thomas Wharton, sun of Philip Lord Wharten (Macaulay Hist. of England, vol. iv, p. 45E). John Wilkes, when emancipated from the precision of his home, became:, thorough • paced iirutiigate. His associates were dissipated men of fashion about town, "dull dogs after all," so Wilkes was, at a later period, accustomed to say of them, audacious without any imagination. and licentious without any wit. " His expensive debaucheries forced him to have recourse to the Jews. He was soon a ruined man, and determined to try his chance in Parliament" I (Macaulay's Essays, col. iii, p. 493). He was more successful with his newspaper, the North Brion., a Melt he undertook in opposition to The Briton, a written in defence of Lord Bute's administration. As a newspaper writer Wilkes made a better Loire than us a speaker. Furtv•four numbers of his weekly paper had been published when Bute resigned. When the forttieth number canto out George Grenville, the brother-in-law of the elder Pitt, was at the head of affairs. By the order of that minister, Wilkes was arrested under a general warrant and conveyed to the Tower. His arrest was pronounced unlawful by the Court of Common Pleas, in which Chief Justice Pratt (afterwards Lord ('amden) presided. - In that famous judgment general warrants were (1.2 , 1,:red to be " unconstitutional, illegal, and absolutely void." Some years later, when the Duke of Grafton was Prime Minister, ‘Wilkes became still more popular, as the subject of a struggle between the House of Commons and the freeholders of Middlesex. The House of Commons, I which hind lost much of the greatness that had • belonged to it in the former century, in a s!» nit ef masterful feebleness, had, by a stretch of power, resolved that Wilkes, who hail been expelled from the House for republishing Nu. 45 of the North /Moo/ and also for printing au obscene poem, was •• incapable of being re-elected into that Parliament." As Macaulay has pointed out, the earlier generation the popular party would have thought it a splendid triumph of the cause of liberty that the King and the Lords should resign to the lower House a portion of the legislative power, and allow it to incapacitate without their consent. But the wind of popular sympathy had veered to another quarter. The freeholders of Middlesex maintained their right to choose as Knight of the Shire whom they would, against the decision of Cie Lower House. H y convicting him of immorality, the opponents of Wilkes had hoped to lower the enthusiasm of the I people in his favour. Happily in England putvsL in a public tam has always stood in the way of his attaining general popularity. To many moral and religious men Wilkes's unprineiphal conduct seemed venial when compared with the hypocritical animosity of his political adversaries, seek :Is Lord Sandwich, one of those buon•companions, for whose degraded private delectation Wilkes had composed his loose poem. "Junius," with his " Letters," entered the field, and was followed in the wordy combat by less vigorous writers, At last Burke, the most high minded and philosophic statesman of those days, laid bare with his usual sagacity and wisdom the real point at issue between the House of Commons and their constituents, in his pamphlet, " Thoughts on the cause of the present discontent," the most carefully finished, if not the most eloquent of Burke's political writings. The House of Commons succumbed, Wilkes was again elected for Middlesex, and continued to be a member of Parliament for many years. The popularity which had been manifested in every form of art, from the medal to the village inn's sign board, declined. To nse his own words, he was " a fire burnt out," but the emoluments of • the lucrative office of Chamberlain of the City of London, to which he was elected in 1779, were an ample compensation for the huzzahs of the mob. -.„-. In 1778, when the volcano was nearly extinct, the old demagogue, sated with pleasure and popularity, settled on the " Royal 'Keith " of Sandham Fort, anti there built what he called • in his letters, his " Villakin." In an exceedingly well-written article, which appeared in the Quarterly I:. ricer for, I think, the second or third quarter of 1874, we arc told " Wilkes's letters to his daughter are full of amusing descriptions of the place, and his neighbours, his difficulty in obtaining provisions, his love for the feathered tribes, the kindness of the gentry of the vicinity in supplying his wants, his visits to them and theirs to him." One Sunday, he tells his " Dear Polly," going over to Church at Shanklin, he met Carrick and his charming wife, who took him back with them to Mr. Fitzmatirice's seat at Knighton. at which they were staying. Here he found Sir Richard Worsley and some of his Neapolitan acquaintance. Sir Richard engaged him to visit him at Appuldurcombe on the Monday, " where be entertained the whole Knighton set at a grand breakfast, Mrs. Carrick, as usual, the most captivating of the whole circle." It is said that in his grounds was a Doric column,dedicated to his profligate friend the poet, Churchill, the base of which, by a sly sarcasm, contained a small stock of choice old port. A far older periodical "The Isle of Wight Magazine, for 1799," has two articles entitled "Memoirs of John Wilkes," which supply further imirticidars of his manner of life. His hours were regular, he rose early for the purpose of what had never before been his practice, worshipping the rising Sun." Acting upon the aesthetic canons of taste, which were accepted by our grandfathers, Wilkes erected pavilions of the Knightsbridge floorcloth manufactory, in the most advantageous points of view. He possessed the happy talent, by no means common to men in the decline of life he had always the appearance of being pleased with himself. The hours he spent in his study which he suffered no person to enter, were by his own account, employed chiefly in the revisal and making additions to what lie used to call "the work," which was meant for posthumous publication under the title of " The life and opinions of John Wilkes." From this he would often read extracts to his more intimate friends, and to some of them he promised a place in his book. In his last visit to the Isle of Wight in the summer of 1797, he told a clergyman, his neighbour, that this labour of so many years, neatly bound in a great number of volumes, should be committed to the flames. With our recent experience of some modern autobiographies, it can hardly be doubted that this piece of self-sacrifice in the conflagration of his posthumous memoirs has redounded to the credit of his memory. From the fact that be made this confidential communication of his intention to a clerical neighbour, we may infer that he had acquired a taste for more decorous society than the company of those with whom he was accustomed "to drink and sing loose catches at one of the most I dissolute clubs in London." Among the associates of his younger days were clergymen who !rtfl voluntarily unfrocked themselves, such as John Horne Tooke and Charles Churchill, who, with his friend Wilkes, has been handed down to posterity by Hogarth's portraits of him as a Russian bear in full canonicals, holding a club and a pot of porter. %%likes's acquaintance with John Home Tooke appears to have begun in Paris, through the congenial medium of the irreverend Lawrence Sterne, and was, by the subsequent quarrel between Tooke and himself, most fatal to Wilkes by its disclosures, that the patriot, who had insulted the king's mother, had ecin• missioned Mr. Thomas Walpole as his go-between to procure a pension for him from the king of £l,OOO upon the Irish establishment, and had also clandestinely accepted large sums of money from the Rockingham administration. Wilkes's clerical friend in the Isle of Wight was, no doubt, of a very different stamp from these ex•clerical cronies and boon-companions of those wild days, before he hail begun "to live cleanly." Wilkes indeed at his Isle of Wight " villakin " had learned to use Mr. Carlyle's phrase "to burn his own smoke, and diffused about him an influence of decorum and courtesy. He told his own storie:, over again, but lie did not break jests upon the Now Testament." The taste shown by him in ornamenting his house and grounds was of a piece with the blue and scarlet and gold knee-bands, with which he used to adorn his person. All was overdone and tawdry. These were harmless weaknesses in the bustling, hospitable, kindly old man. The last time he crossed the Solent in the summer of 1797, he had a long and tedious passage, owing to the failure of the whit! ; upon this ho remarked that if this was the case again, he would not revisit the Isle of Wight, as nothing was so obnoxious to him throng- nowt his life as a dead calm. The prediction came true ;_ he returned no more to the Island, but died at the house of his daughter in Grosvenor-square, London, an the 28th of December of that same year, at the age of 70. By his last will, Wilkes bequeathed tile lease of his cottage, together with its furniture. to his illegitimate daughter, Harriet Wilkes. When Thorne wrote his account of the Isle of Wight. " the cottage had been smartened. and was to let furnish...al, but Canon Venables writing in IE6O says " that the cottage which first made Sundown famous has been lately swept away by the march of so-called improvement, regardless of the historical interest attaching to the spot." The cottage or " " has shared its owner's fate. Who thinks or knows anything now about the ncisy politician of whom even good King George 111. could write to Lord Chatham. "I will have nothing to do with that devil Wilkes." Like roost brilliant talkers, he was nut able to bring his brilliancy lido play upon leper. In all his published writings there is hardly any• thing, either in matter or manner, which rises above the merest common-place, unless it be a character of Lord Chatham, some of the biting things in which are impregnated, so it is said with rather a subtle venom; but as Dr. Johnson has remarked of a far more polished an d caustic writer, the author of the "Letters of Junius," "let not injudicious admiration mistake the venom of the slug: for the vigour of the bow." Wilkes's private letters, of which two collections have been published, are dull—the most sparkling are those from the Isle of Wight. His speeches in Parliament, which he wrote before-hand, and learnt by heart, shew the same absence of liveliness. He had the ready wit which could say good things at the proper moment, but he waste-: the staying power which is needed for any protracted exertion of intellect. The soil of his mind was wanting in real fertility and productiveness as the "Royal Heath," where he built his "villakin."—I am, Sir, yours obediently, EDWARD BOUCHER JAMES. Carisbrooke.