# Miscellaneous Tales

Bits and pieces

## Tichborne Dole

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0002194/18550825/145/0006
Sun (London) - Saturday 25 August 1855

BRITISH ARCHAEOLOGICAL ASSOCIATION. NEWPORT, ISLE OF WIGHT, AUG. 23.

The members of this association made an excursion to Puckaster Cove, visiting Niton and other churches in their route. 

Yesterday evening various relics were exhibited at the Town-hall. Among other things a picture of the distribution of the Tichborne Dole attracted much attention, and was explained in a paper contributed by Mr. Baigent on the subject. The following was given as the origin of this ancient and curious custom. When the Lady Mabella, one of the house of Tichborne, worn out with infirmity and age, waa lying on her death-bed, she besought her husband that he would grant the means of leaving a charitable bequest, in a dole of bread, to be distributed to all who should apply ; whereupon he offered to give her the produce of as much land as she could crawl round, she being bed-ridden, while a faggot of wood was burning. She accepted the offer, and, being placed in the park, crawled round 32 acres in the specified time. The field in question was situated near the entrance of the park, and still retained the name of Crawls. The produce of this land was sufficient for 1,400 loaves, weighing 22 ounces each, which were for centuries distributed to all corners ; and the painting exhibited a representation of the distribution in 1670, and was very valuable as portraying the costume of the period. The distribution is now confined to the parish only.

The Rev. Mr. Kell then read a valuable and interesting paper with reference to the ancient tin trade of the Isle of Wight, proving by an immense mass of authorities that the tin which formed the subject of traffic in the early ages was brought from Cornwall across to the Isle of Wight.

This paper was followed by a lively discussion, after which the company separated for the day.


TH: painting https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tichborne_Dole#/media/File:Tichborne_dole.jpg


---
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000170/18550901/006/0003
Isle of Wight Observer - Saturday 01 September 1855

BRITISH ARCHAEOLOGICAL ASSOCIATION.

On Thursday se'nnight the association made an excursion Puckaster Cove, and, after inspecting Knighton Church, in which, however, there was little to interest them, they proceeded along the beautiful road known as the Underclltf to St. Lawrence and through Ventnor to Bonchurch. St. Lawrence, which is reputed to be the smallest church in the island, and probably in England, was very curious little structure, originally only 20 feet by 12, but enlarged within the last years by the addition of a chancel. Mr. Davis stated that but small portion of the original remained, including antique doorway and bell turret. The church was first erected about the year 1170. It contained a curious painting of the Royal arms, which had been put up at the time of the Restoration. Passing through Ventnor, the party proceeded to Bonchurch, another rather singular structure situated on the seacoast, and not far from a place called Monk's Bay, where, according to tradition, the monks in former times landed when they came to duty. One side of the church was covered with the remains of a curious painting on the stone, the probable nature of which Mr. Planche explained to the company, but which is now nearly obliterated. It had been discovered on the removal of the plaster, and there were appearances on the other walls as if the church had been formerly painted throughout. After spending some time here they proceeded to Monk's Bay, where Mr. White, a resident, pointed out some remains of a Roman encampment, very similar indeed to those of Monmouthshire, and which, like them, had half washed away by the sea. He also mentioned that Johan von Muller, one of the most exact historians of his day, had positively asserted that the Roman fleet were permanently stationed outside the Isle of Wight, that there could be no doubt of that people having visited it. Mr. Planche thought that it was highly probable that the fleet were stationed at Puckaster Bay, near which there were the remains of Roman road; Mr. Black said that this spot was interesting from its having been one the first in which Christianity was preached to the Saxons. The party next proceeded to Wroxall Downs, and visited various barrows, where excavations had been made. In one or two charcoal aud some calcined remains were found, shewing clearly that they had been used for the sepulture of a people who burnt their dead, but no kind of urn or any coins were found, and a thunder-storm coming on prevented the party from prosecuting their researches with any great minuteness. Some of the charcoal and burnt remains were preserved for the purpose of further examination, and the party returned to Newport after a long and interesting drive.

Among the curiosities exhibited at the Town-hall, Newport, was a singular picture of the presentation of the Tichborne Dole, which has attracted much attention, and with respect to which Mr. F. Bagent communicated an interesting paper. The family of Tichborne date their possession of the present patrimony, the manor at Tichborne, near Winchester, so far back as 200 years before the Conquest. The origination of the ancient and curious custom known as the Tichborne Dole was thus related:—When the Lady Mabella, worn out with age and firmity, was lying on her deathbed, she besought her loving husband, as her last request, that he grant her the means of leaving behind her a charitable bequest, in a dole of bread to be distributed to all who should apply for it annually on the feast the Annunciation of the Blessed Virgin Mary. Sir Roger, her husband, readily acceded to the request by promising the produce of as much land as she could go over in the vicinity of the park while a certain brand or billet was burning, supposing that, from her long infirmity (for she had been bedridden some years), she would able to go round small portion only of his property. The venerable dame, however, ordered her attendants to convey her to the corner of the park, where, being deposited the ground, she seemed to receive a renovation of strength, and, to the surprise of her anxious and admiring lord, who began to wonder where this pilgrimage might end, she crawled round several and goodly acres. The field which was the scene of Lady Mabella's extraordinary feat retains the name of Crawls to this day. It is situated near the entrance of the park, and contains an area of 23 acres. Her task being completed, she was re-conveyed to her chamber and, summoning her family to her bedside, predicted its prosperity while the annual dole existed, and left her malediction on any of her descendants who should be so mean or covetous as to discontinnc or divert it, prophesying that when such should happen the old house should fall, and the family would become extinct from the failure of heirs male, and that this would be foretold by a generation of seven sons, being followed immediately after by a generation of seven daughters, and no son. The custom thus founded in the reign of Henry II. continued to be observed for centuries, the 25th of March became the annual festive day of the family, and the friends and different branches of the house of Tichborne came from far and near to witness and assist at the performance of the good lady's legacy. In 1670 Sir H. Tichborne employed Giles Tilbury, an eminent Flemish painter, to represent the ceremony of the distribution of the bread. The picture was highly valuable, as giving a faithful representation of old Tichborne-house in the time of Charles II., which Camden nearly a century previous had declared to be a " very antient house.' It was pulled down in 1803, and the present edifice erected. The picture passed by marriage into the hands of Mr. Michael Blount, and was sold by him to the late Sir E. Doughty, at the nominal price of £400. It was usual to take 1,400 loaves for the purpose of the dole of 1lb. 10oz. avoirdupois weight each, and if after the distribution there remained any persons to whom bread had not been distributed they received 2d. each in lieu thereof. It was not until the middle of the last century that the custom was discontinued, when, under the pretence of attending Tichborne Dole, vagabonds, gipsies, and idlers of every description assembled from all quarters, pilfering throughout the neighbourhood, and at last, the gentry and magistrates complaining, it was discontinued in 1796. This gave great offence to many who had been accustomed to receive it, and a partial falling of the old house in 1803 was looked upon as an ominous sign of Lady Mabella's' displeasure. Singularly enough, the baronet of that day had seven sons, and when he was succeeded the eldest there appeared a generation of seven daughters, and the apparent fulfilment of the prophecy was completed by the change of the name of the late baronet to Doughty, under the will of his kinswoman.

The Rev. Mr. Kell then read a paper on the ancient tin trade of the island.

At the conclusion of the paper an interesting discussion upon the subject rose; after which a vote of thanks was awarded to Mr. Kell, and the proceedings of the following day stated by the President, and the party separated.

