# Murder Wadden Apse Heath



https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000170/18620308/003/0003
Isle of Wight Observer - Saturday 08 March 1862

THE CORONER'S INQUEST AT LAKE.

As we have received many animadversions upon the fact that James Joseph Wadden, who was arrested on Saturday P.C. Knott on charge of the wilful murder of William White, was not present at the Coroner's inquest held at Lake on Monday, we will make few comments thereon. We admire the jealousy with which the public guards this ancient Court, but inclined to think that great misapprehension exists not only in the public mind, but also in the magisterial mind, with regard to its functions; otherwise, we are at a loss to imagine why magistrates so often oppose the production of accused person before those Courts. The object of a Coroner's Inquisition, then, is to enquire into the causes which led to the death of the person upon whom it is held; and any evidence touching such causes is receivable, *let such evidence affect whomsoever it might*: therefore, no person is accused, so far as such enquiry is concerned, until after a verdict is rendered. The power of magistrates, however, is much more limited, for they must have an accused person before them prior to acting, and they can only *receive such evidence as may tend to establish the guilt of the person accused*. The functions, accordingly, of Coroner's Inquisition are of far wider and higher nature than those of a magistrate; so our Saxon forefathers, in the former case, wisely interposed between the Crown and its subjects the protection of a jury, which is not required in the latter case, because suspicion and accusation have already done their worst towards the person of the prisoner, who, if guiltless, has his remedy in an action for false imprisonment. The difference in the functions of the two Courts cannot be better illustrated than by reference to the Road Murder. That Coroner's Inquisition was prematurely closed, with a general verdict of "Wilful Murder against some person or persons unknown;" so that no evidence could afterwards be received, by any constituted authority, except as far it affected some accused person: a miscarriage of justice consequently followed, notwithstanding that two persons were subsequently charged with the crime before magistrates. The omission of evidence thus caused the hasty and ill-advised action (to say the least it) of the Coroner was not afterwards to be supplied, even by the extraordinary proceedings adopted by Mr. Senders, barrister and a magistrate; consequently, that remarkable crime remains unpunished to this day. There is no doubt at all in our minds that an accused person could demand to be brought before the Coroner's Inquisition when the case on which he is accused is being enquired into; and have the power, counsel or otherwise, to cross-examine a material witness (for instance) who may die between the inquest and the trial. Indeed, upon the exercise such right may depend the life or death of a prisoner; so that it is inexplicable to us, seeing that there cannot be any conflicting jurisdiction, why magistrates so often interpose to prevent the presence of a prisoner at an inquest. Take the present lamentable case of Apse Heath, and let any impartial man judge how much of the charge of "Wilful Murder "against James Joseph Wadden" rests upon the unsifted testimony of Jane Smith; afterwards, let him suppose that that testimony can be materially shaken by cross-examination, but in the interim that Jane Smith should die;—is there any patriotic Englishman who would not, in such a case, denounce magisterial interference which had brought about such a result. When such a result is *possible*, it ought to be prevented; therefore, an accused person as a matter of course, ought to be present at any and every enquiry touching either his liberty or his life. Not altogether because his presence may assist the enquiry as far as the public is concerned, but as a matter of fair play to the accused. Let us, however, be fairly understood: we are bringing no charge against the magistrates beyond the mere fact that Wadden was *not* present at the Coroner's Inquisition which brought a verdict of "wilful murder' against him; but *why* we do not know, neither do any of our correspondents state. Would any magistrate like a similar course adopted towards himself, even in a matter of much less moment? Still, when we know the result of applications in former similar instances has been flat refusal, we may fairly take it for granted that such would have been the case now. Again, we do not pretend that any of the evidence in this matter would have been shaken; but, in the case of Lacy last year, we know a little cross-examination did most materially shake the evidence, so much so that the magistrates committed him for manslaughter after the Coroner's jury (without the benefit of such cross-examination) had delivered a verdict of "wilful murder." Radicals, we are accused of being, we beg to say that we are ultra-Conservative on all points of our Glorious Constitution which secure the liberty of the subject—none of which are older or more applicable to the wants of the day than the Coroner's Inquisition; and the same time jealously sensitive of the reputation of our fair Island, we deprecate any act which may tend to bring a blot upon its escutcheon.


https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000170/18620308/018/0003
Isle of Wight Observer - Saturday 08 March 1862

TO DO

THE FATAL OCCURRENCE AT APSE HEATH.

About noon on Sunday, intelligence reached us that a murder hnd been perpetrated at Apse Heath, not far from a village known as Lake. The news received numerous confirmations in the course of the day, and on Monday the whole particulars came out at a coroner's inquest, held at the Stag-inn, Lake.

The facts of the case are these: About six year ago, James Joseph Wadden, a naval pensioner, became acquainted with one Jane Smith, a fair-haired comely looking young woman, through her visiting his house, or rather habitation, a miserable hut at Winford, to attend upon his wife, who was ill. The wife died in December of the same year, and Jane Smith lived with the widower as housekeeper until July in the following year; occasionally, from that time up to the present, going to see him, to prepare his meals, &c. Reports have been in circulation imputing an improper intimacy between them, but this was denied by the young woman in her evidence before the Coroner. The victim of Wadden had been known to Jane Smith from a boy upwards, and about thirteen months ago an intimacy sprang up between them, and they intended shortly to be married. This intimacy appears to have been regarded by Wadden with peculiar antipathy, and he made no secret of his hatred to White, and was perpetually insulting him. However, White, though a tall, powerful, and athletic young man, appears have been of no very antagonistic or hostile disposition, and, according to Jane Smith's statement, made no objection whatever to her visiting his self-made rival, Wadden. This miserable old criminal is quite a different person, being a man of middle height, with a very unprepossessing personal appearance, and of a morose, vindictive, and sullen disposition. Indeed, according to testimony of those who have known and been associated with him from youth, he was always characterised by a revengefulness and malicious disposition to hold out threats.

The fatal affray of Saturday night seems to have entirely originated with Wadden, who apparently visited the house for the express purpose of irritating White, the history of which was very particularly stated by the first witness at the inquest. The evidence was given in such a lucid and straightforward manner that any comment on it is unnecessary. It might, however, be explained that when the witness Moorman heard the "gate rattle" by one of the men coming out into the road, it was at the time when Jane Smith ran in with the bar as she said the men were both in the highroad, quarrelling. This explanation of Moorman's evidence would corroborate her statement, that the men had had no encounter before she took in the bar. The Coroner, in summing up, pointed out to the jury that the case was not one of manslaughter, inasmuch as the knife was used after the bar was taken away, and there was no evidence to show that White was seeking and likely to take Wadden's life. In a fight with fists, if one the combatants is so far overpowering the other that his life should be in danger of being destroyed, then the jeopardised could use a knife—but even then unjustifiably— and the law would view it manslaughter. But, if in the combat or conflict one of the men used knife to obtain some unfair and foul advantage over the other, then the law would regard it as murder. So jealous is the law of human life that under no circumstances can a verdict of justifiable homicide be accepted but when a person is assailed by some deadly weapon, and no chance or possibility existing of his escaping with his life, except by taking that of the assailant.

This is the third murdering case that has happened in the Isle of Wight since 1860, and all within six miles of each other; so that our Island, that could once boast an history almost unblotted by foul deeds, has now the disadvantage of being notorious for three. We recollect, when at Winchester on the Whitworth trial, seeing some empiric there, who passed himself off as an astrologist, and, with diagram that looked remarkably like a "round robin," endeavoured to shew that some sanguinary star was passing over the Island, and would do so, periodically, for some years to come, causing some fierce outbreak of human passion each time. We don't mention this for the superstitious to swallow, but simply as a curious fact which some of our readers, who were at Winchester at the time, may recollect.

Before concluding these remarks, we may mention that we are as ready and prompt as any one to afford information to the public of every interesting or exciting occurrence; but we have no desire to parade the details of a crime about the place, reeking with human blood and wickedness, and on this occasion we only did it, without making any charge, because an imperfect and inaccurate affair was circulating and sold about the place, purporting to give "full particulars." We must protest against this disreputable catch-penny hawking, and murder-panic traffic; because it is not done in the legitimate spirit of journalism, but merely to nett a few miserable pence, by disgracefully administering to the depraved and prurient curiosity of the multitude. It is hoped that no more of it will occur, and that in


fntnte no greater notoriety be given to a shocking affair than necessary the ordinary course of journalism. The murderer Wadden was taken into custody on Saturday night, and on Monday taken before a magistrate at Newport nnd remanded until Saturday. On Monday an inquisition was opened by F. Blake, esq., coroner for the Isle of Wight, and evidence gi»en as bel»w adduced. The first witness, Jane Smith, was very much affected throughout the inquiry, and gave some parts of her evidence in a very impressive manner. After the usual oath had been administered her, the coroner solemnly charged her to speak the truth she had sworn to do, an! the inquiry commenced.

Jane Smith, being sworn, deposed—I am single woman, and live at Apse Heath with my mother and a little boy, my son, who was years of age last November. I knew William White, the deceased; he lived at Brading. I knew him from childhood upwards. He was a hay trusser. have been on terms of intimacy with him for these last IS months. He has been in the habit of visiting me on Sundays, and sometimes in the week when his work laid that way, and very frequently when it did not, or when he had no work at all. He was making preparations for our marriage. On Saturday he came to our house and dined there, leaving, I think, about half-past 2, again returning in the evening about a quarter past 7. About a quarter of hour after that time, James Joseph Wadden came into the court of the house and asked my little boy to come and have supper with him, and sleep with him. I did sot see Wadden, but I knew his voice very well. I said he should not go, and Wadden replied, "I have some cakes and things, and some bacon and eggs." made no remark, and Wadden continued, "That is more than that d lacy rascal would get for you." did not see Wadden, as I was fastening up my jacket, and he did not come inside. could see White, there was a light in the room, which my mother lighted just before she went out—about a quarter of an hour before the deceased came in. [At this point of the proceedings the witness fainted. usual restoratives were applied, but she remained in a kind of swoon for upwards of 20 minutes.] On reviving, she continued—Wadden in the same breath said White had not cut 10 tons of 1 ,- in a month. In reply to which. White said, " I'll re work than you, Joe, any day. I have had enough of your nonsense, Joe; if you say anything more I'll put my fist alongside of your head." Wadden then replied, "You had better try it on," "You had better see about it," I am not sure which. White then sprang up towards the door. I pressed the door to, put my back against it, and seised White round the neck. I struggled with all strength and energy to keep him inside, and when I found my strength was failing me I got from the door, or rather he pulled me from it. I said to my little boy, "Willie, put the 'pinner' in the door." The pinner is an iron bar—part of an old cart. Willie did as I told him, and fastened the door. White immediately pulled the "pinner" from the staples, and out he ran with it in hia hands. I called out to my child, "Mind the fire," and ran out the house after him, and begged and entreated him to come in. White and Wadden were then both in the road, but not doing anything besides talking in quarrelling and wrangling manner, but I do not know what they said. I got in between them and taking hold of White, said, "Oh, Bill, do come in, and give me that bolt." He replied, "Get away, girl, I won't hurt you." I tried hard to get the bolt—the "pinner" or iron bar—out af his hands, and at last did so. He had not struck Wadden with it, I am quite certain. I ran in doors with it immediately, and having put it down, went out again. As I was going in the garden gate from the road, I saw them seize each other —I da not know which first—about the shoulders. "Whilst they were doing it, I ran in with the bar; and, having thrown it down, run out again as fast as could. 1 believe they were then both down in the road. Wadden was under, and White was lying on him, carelessly like, with his legs thrown out. There was struggling, no crying out, and nothing said then—they wcTe doing nothing at all, not one trying to get and the other to keep him down. They appeared as it they had no power of themselves to move. I was not more than minute running in with the bar, and out again. am not sure, but I believe Edward Moorman was there when came out and first saw them lying on the ground. He was trying to get White off Wadden, but could not, I suppose, because the life was going from him but I did not then know he was hurt. Moorman not being able to make any impression towards moving; him, I said, "Let me help," and we, together, took him off. When I was lifting him up he struggled twice, and I thought to myself "Oh, Bill, you are overcome." He could neither stand nor speak, and we laid him up against the bank. I put my hand on his breast and found the blood witness here gave a very noticeable shudder], and said, "Oh, he has murdered him!" White's eyes were then open, and I think he was alive. I could just hear him breathe for about a quarter of an hour, should think. He died an the bank. After we had taken .White off, Wadden got up without assistance, far as I saw, and walked away. I did not speak to him, or hear what he said, I was too much taken up with Bill. He got and walked away immediately; but think Moorman, said to him, "You have killed him." I do not know whether Wadden had been drinking or not, but White had had a little ale I think. Wadden lived at Winford, about half a mile from my cottage, and is a farm labourer; but has been to sea, and is pensioner. I do not know his age; he told me he was 53, but other people say he is 60.

 A Juryman said—He 88 or 60; I have known him from a boy. Witness resumed.—White was last September, and was taller than Wadden, but I don't think he was atoitt. I have known Wadden six seven years; he ia a widower, and I have not been on intimate terms with him. have visited his house sometimes. I lived at his house when his wife was ill; six years ago it was, if my memory serves right. She died in the month of December, and I continued to live with him until the following July. Wadden had not visited house for -three or four months until Saturday, but he was in the habit of calling at the gate and asking me to com* and ' get his tea ready, and I went occasionally. White wis ' generally in the house when he called, and Wadden, if lie could not see him, could hear him talking me. He knew White, and when he met him he would always have something offensive to say. have heard him say to my boy, when he has called at the gate, "la 'that lazy fellow. White, in there J" He never said anything to me about White, more than "If I were you, would not walk with such fellow." The last time he was in the courtyard—three or four months ago—he wanted to pick quarrel with White, but he would have nothing to say to him, although Wadden stood outside of the door swearing at him and abusing him. Wadden never talked to me of marriage, but some time ago he said he should like to have me. I said, "I could not have you if every hair of your head was gold." I not know if was aware of my being engaged te be married to White. About three months ago, when Bill said, "Surely, Jane, I cannot stand this," Wadden said, "Let him come out here, I'll put the length this knife into him or any one else that interrupts mc. I always have my knife sharpened for any one that interrupts me." Just before Christmas, my sister's child was baptised, and on the occasion I was at her house, when Wadden came in and said, " I have got a cup tea ready if you will come in." He did not address any one in particular, and I said, "What, for all us, Joe?" White waa there, and Wadden replied, "No, not for that thing there; would sooner give him a drop of poison." Upon this Bill said to me, "Put on your things and let us out, or we shall be too late for chapel." While had no angry feeling towards Wadden, and when the latter has asked me to come and get his tea I have asked Bill he had any objection, and he would say, "No, none at all." Wadden was in the habit of carrying knife about with him in his pocket, and I should know it again if I saw it. I do not know what he carried it for, but sometimes he used it when eating his meals. Sometime ago, when a report was in circulation that the police were after a navvy the Island for murdering a man in France, Wadden said I am always ready prepared, I have a knife if any one interrupts me." [A large knife, very much stained -with blood, was here produced, being, handle and all, 104 inches in length. The blade was very much worn, and very sharp st its point. Witness, at the sight the knife, exclaimed, "Yes, that the knife stabbed poor Bill with," and cried most bitterly.] I did not see which was getting the best of it, but I should think Wadden stabbed him first going off, for White was much the stronger and mote powerful man, and the former, I should think, could not have brought hies to the ground. The bar Bill carried out was round and formerly belonged to my grandfather's cart. I do not think he used it. Bill was too meek-hearted. Wadden has threatened to burn up in our beds, or any one else who interrupted him. I had not the presence mind on Saturday to tell my dear Bill he would stab him. I have said him many times before, " Don't say anything him, Bill, or he will stab you." I knew him well, «nd heard him threaten to do so often. Edward Moorman, on being sworn, said—I work for Mr. Roach, at a place called Smoky Hole. On Saturday last I was going past the last witness's cottage, and hc4td dreadful noise of voices in quarrelling. I heard White aay, before I could see who they were, "Not cut nut five tons of hay in a week ! Oet out of the way, Jane, I'll kill that old b—." I then heard Wadden say, "Oh, will ye; then come out into the road and we'll have it out here outright in the highroad." I wasn't in sight of them then in consequence the turning the road. I then heard White say, " Let go, Jane then heard the gate rattle; after which I could hear thew scuffling in the road, but did not hear any blows or words. I run as fast as ever I could—in less than half-a-minute—it seemed to all done in about minute—up them and said, "Hullo, what ye up to}" They both down, and Wadden r was under. When I first saw them White looked as if he was striving to get up, and not to keep the other down. I could not see what Wadden was doing, but he - seemed to have his hands down by his side. My first words were, "Hullo, what ye doing here?" Wadden , said, " Oh, Ned, is that you ? Here'a murder done here." I said, "Oh, no, don't talk like that." I then began to pull White off, and said, "Get off, William." He seemed to struggle a little with his arms, and Wad. den's basket was by his side and some of his errands had fallen out. White, in moving, touched the basket, and another errand or two came out, and Wadden said, " Hullo, here, you're overthrowing my basket again." I don't know that he said anything more, and I pulled off White, who felt so limmer that I thought he was tipsy. Then I thought that surely the man must have fainted, for he did not seem to have any strength at all. I set him down on the bank, and Jane Smith cried out, "He has stabbed him." I pulled his clothes open and saw some blood on his shirt. Wadden was just got up then, and I said to him, "Joseph, you have stabbed this man," or "you have killed this man," I do not remember which. He said, "The b , what did he come at me with the poker for?" He said more, and picked up his errands and put them in his basket. I said, "Well, I shall after some one," and run on to the next house, and saw no more of Wadden. White was much the most powerful man. don't think White spoke after he was down. I have known Wadden five or six years, but never heard him say anything about White, nor saw him with a knife. Wadden appeared to be sober. By Juryman.—When first saw them, Jane Smith was there. did not see any bar of iron.
 
 P.C. Walter Knott.—I am stationed Lake, and received intelligence this occurrence about ten minutes Fast Bon Saturday. In consequence of the information received I went to Apse Heath, and found the deceased leaning against the bank. There were several persons there, and White appeared to be dead. His shirt was open, and I saw a wound in his chest, from which blood was still oozing. There appeared be a quantity of blood about him. In consequence of what Moorman told me, I went to Wadden's house at Winford. He was gone to bed. I knocked at the door, and he looked out of window and asked who was there, and said he would speak to me from the window. 1 told him to come down and open the door, which he did. He had on a pair of drawers and a blue shirt. I told him that I wanted him, and he said, "Is the man hurt ?" I said, " Put your trowsers on and I will tell you." I went up stairs with him, and as soon he had put them on I searched him, and found in his right hand pocket this knife. [The clasp knife was produced.] I asked him if it was the knife he was in the habit of using ? He said, "Yes, I never carry another." I then said to him, "I shall take you into custody, and charge you with the wilful murder of William White." He then said, "Is he dead?" I replied, "Yes, he appeared to be quite dead when I left him in the road." Upon which he said, "If he is dead I suppose I shall be hung." He also said, "I should not have done it if White had not come out with an iron bar and struck me on the shoulder. merely struck him in self-defence in the highroad." His trowsers and white frock were covered with fresh blood. There is also blood the knife. I did not notice any marks of blows or bruises on Wadden when I walked with him to Newport, and he complained of no pain. Robert Henry Leeson, on being sworn, said—I am a member of the Royal College Surgeons, and practise at Sandown. About 9 o'clock on Saturday night was sent for to to Apse Heath, and found the deceased lying against the bank in the highroad, quite dead. I found the wound about four inches from the left breast —an incised wound about aa inch in length externally. put my finger into the wound, but I could not get to the bottom of it. Its direction was—speaking the medium line of the body—downwards, backwards, and outwards. The knife produced would cause such a wound. The wound was of itself sufficient to cause death, either from hemorrhage or from admitting aa access of air to the heart, one of the vessels at its root being pierced—the right pulmonary artery. From the direction the wound, he might either hare been stabbed when on the ground or when in an upright position. If he had been stabbed whilst standing, he would not have strength left to have thrown the other man ; but in falling forwards, as people usually do when stabbed, his weight might hare brought the other man i to the ground.

P.C. Knott recalled.—Wadden told me he had a pot of ale for breakfast, and three-penny worth of liquor afterwards in the evening at the Stag-inn. He was quite sober.

Jane Smith recalled.—Wadden was in the habit of coming into Lake on Saturday evenings for errands. White did not strike Wadden with the bar. When he went out into the road I followed close upon him, and wrenched the bar from his hands. I tried to prevent him from going out; and, in a manner of speaking, strained myself all to pieces in holding him back, but he would go, but did not strike him.

The Coroner having summed up, and the jury being left by themselves, shortly afterwards returned a verdict of "Wilful Murder against James Joseph Wadden."

The remains of the deceased were removed to Brading on Tuesday, and deposited in their final resting-place in the parish churchyard on Wednesday.


https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000170/18620315/016/0004
Isle of Wight Observer - Saturday 15 March 1862

The Murder Case.—*James Joseph Wadden* was placed at the bar on the Coroner's warrant, for the wilful murder of William White, on the previous Saturday evening, at Apse Heath.

The hall was crowded to excess, leaving many unable to gain admission. The prisoner shewed no particular signs of contrition for the crime, but occasionally laid his head on his arms that were placed on the front the dock, as if in tears, and wiped his eyes with his fingers, but no tear was visible. He is of short light stature, and to all appearance much older than what he has been stated. Upon Jane Smith being led into court by a friend, both in deep mourning for the deceased, the prisoner looked most anxiously upon her, who was allowed a seat at the table to give her evidence, which it would be superfluous repeat, being the same as given at the inquest, and which appeared in our last impression. On being questioned by the Bench, she said there was not time for White to strike Wadden with the iron bar, as she directly followed him and took it from him, but she did lose sight of them when she was indoors, but she immediately went out again, and found them both lying in the road, with Wadden underneath.

Being questioned by the prisoner, she said—When he arrived that evening, he said, "Where's William?" She didn't say "He is indoors, and if you want him come in and see him." She did not make proposals to go to his house two evenings in the week. Nothing had been said about sending her child to school, but he said, some time ago, that he would send him to school, but she said she would send him, and pay for it herself.

The statements of Edwin Moorman, Dr. Leeson, and F.C. Knott were the same as given at the inquest; the latter producing another witness.

William Lee, turnpike-keeper at Lake, in whose charge the prisoner was given, after being apprehended on the night of the murder, who deposed that Wadden was brought to his house at half-past 10, and he had him in charge while P.C. Knott was having his supper. The prisoner spoke first, and after some talk commenced about the murder, saying it was a bad job, and he supposed they'd hang him. He had half-a-dozen eggs in his basket, and wanted the youngster to go home with him. He said he knew he did it, and meant to do it, but he supposed they'd bring it in "self-defence" as White struck him across the shoulder with the poker. The prisoner added that Jane Smith had a part of his wages, and drew his pension. Witness helped to remove the body from the cart into the Stag-inn, which he knew to be that of William White.

The prisoner, being cautioned, said, "I committed the deed; but I did it in self-defence."

The Bench then committed the prisoner for trial at the next Assizes, for the wilful murder of William White.



https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000250/18620719/229/0008
Sheffield Daily Telegraph - Saturday 19 July 1862


ALso  Leeds Times - [Saturday 19 July 1862](https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000336/18620719/022/0005) under title "Lilled by a Jealous Rival


TO DO

The Isle of Wight Murder.—Western Circuit.—Winchester, July 17.— Before Mr. Justice Keating. —James Joseph Wadden, a labouring man, aged 56 years, was indicted for the wilful murder of William White, at Newchurch, Isle of Wight, on the 1st March last. Mr. Beethan, with Mr. Way, for the prosecution, end Mr. Bullen for the prisoner. The prisoner was a widower, being farm labourer, and also an array pensioner, and the deceased was a hay-trusser, 27 years old. A single young woman, named Jane Smith, and her son (five years old), lived with her mother in a cottage at Apse-heath, two miles from Lake, on the road to Sandown. She and the deceased had been acquaintances from childhood, and they were preparing for their marriage. Deceased was in the cottage on the Saturday night, the 1st of March, when the prisoner came to the door to invite the young woman’s child to sup with him. She had long known the prisoner, and had refused to become his wife; but he was often apt threaten persons with violence, and she was to be on had terms with him. When the prisoner entered the cottage he commenced taunting the deceased and abusing him, as was usual whenever they met. The quarrel proceeded, and presently deceased took the bar of the door in his hand and went into the outer court, where the prisoner stood. The young woman then rushed between them, took the bar away from deceased and ran indoors with it. Coming out again directly to the court she found the prisoner on the ground lying on his back and the deceased was stretched upon mm, the face downwards, the legs and arms thrown out loosely. A man happened to be passing the premises, and he lilted the deceased up, when blood was found to be flowing from his breast, and he died without speaking. It appeared that he had been stabbed with a formidable clasp knife. Before the county magistrates, when committed, he said, "I committed the deed, but did it in self-defence." Tne evidence was very clear, and at its close Mr. Bullen addressed the jury in extenuation. The judge having carefully summed up, the jury found a verdict of guilty of manslaughter, and the prisoner was sentenced to be kept in penal servitude for ten years.

---
https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000495/18620719/060/0010
Hampshire Advertiser - Saturday 19 July 1862

HANTS SUMMER ASSIZES (Continued from the Seventh Page.) CROWN COURT. — 
...

 THE ISLE OF WIGHT MURDER. James Joseph Wadden, labourer, was indicted for the wilful murder of William White, at Newchurch, on the Isle of March last. Mr. Beetham and Mr. Way prosecuted, and Mr. Bullen defended the prisoner. We give the evidence *in extenso*.
 
 Jane Smith was a single woman living at Apse Heath with her mother. She knew prisoner at the bar. Had known him six or seven years. He lived at Winford. His wife was ill and died. Witness nursed her. Since then witness and her mother for a time looked after his house. She knew William White, of Brading, a hay trusser, who for some time had been paving his addresses to her. (Witness here became deeply affected.) Two or three months before the Ist of March Wadden abused White and swore at him. White said, "surely Jane I cannot, stand this." Prisoner, who heard this, said, " let him coma out here, I will put the length of my knife into him." Wadden was then sober. White did not go out. On March Ist White dined at witnesses and left the house, returning at a quarter- past 7 o'clock, he having had a little drink. Wadden came into the pathway in front of the house. Wadden asked if her little boy would come and sup and sleep with him. Witness said he should not go. Wadden said, " here's some cakes and eggs for him, that's more than that lazy rascal would get for him. He could not cut ten tons of hay in a month.'* White retorted, "I will do more work than you any day." Wadden could hear this. White said, "I have had enough of your nonsence ; if you say anything more to me I will put my I fist alongside your head." Wadden replied, "you had better try it on," or " you had better see about it." White sprang from his seat upon this. Witness shut the door and leant her back against it. She tried with all her strength to keep him in. She found her strength failing and asked her little boy to put up the bar to the door. The child did so, but White pulled it from the staple, thrust her from the door, and ran out with the iron bar in his hand. Witness ran out after him immediately. White and Wadden were in the road. She got in between them, saying, "Oh, Bill, do come in." (The witness here again was terribly distressed.) She drew the bar from his hand and threw it indoors. She again ran out, and found White and Wadden lying in the road. Wadden was lying under, and White upon him. Edward Mormon was there, having come up while she threw the bar away. They were not struggling; White was lying carelessly upon Wadden. Morman helped her to raise White, and they leant him against the bank. He struggled twice on being raised, and never moved again. She put her hand upon him, and found blood upon hia breast. She said, "He is murdered; here's a stab." Wadden got up and put some "errands" which had fallen out into hia basket and walked away. Mr. Leeson, the surgeon, came, and the wound was pointed out to him. A knife was produced, which witness identified as belonging to Wadden. Cross-examined.— Prisoner's wife died six years ago last December. She (witness) lived with him till the following July. She never lived with him as his wife, nor was her child his child. She was engaged to White ; prisoner might have known it. White was of an amiable temper. There was no ill-feeling between them. Wadden swore at White, and called him a lazy fellow. Could not tell why there was any ill-feeling between them. White was in a rage wh'en he forced her from the door. The night was very dark, and she could not see White nor Wadden till she got to the garden gate. They were on the further side of the road. Wadden' s temper was malicious and bad. He was always kind to the little boy, and offered to pay for his schooling. Edwin Morman said he lived at Smoky Hole, which was half way between prisoner's and last witness's house. On Saturday night, March Ist, at about a quarter to 8 o'clock, he passed Smith's house. He heard White say " Not cut cut but five tons of hay in a week; get out of the way, Jane, I will kill that old ." Wadden said, " Come out here in the road, and wo will have it out here." Witness was eight or ten rods from them. He heard the gate rattle, and a scuffle. He ran as fast as he could, and found Wadden on his back and White on top of him. Witness said, " Hallo ! what are you doing here »" Wadden said, "Is that you, Ned ? Here is murder done here." Witness replied, "No, no; don't talk like that ; get up, Bill," and helped White up, who never moved or spoke. White's arm knocked a basket containing errands over, which was at Wadden's side. Wadden said, " There you are again, throwing out my errands." White never spoke first nor last. Last witness and himself turned White on the bank. Wadden still laid on the ground. Smith said, "He has stabbed him." Blood ran down White's shirt. Witness said, " You have gabbed or killed that man, and I shall go and fetch some one." Wadden said, " What did he come out to me with the poker for? Witness left, and returned in a quarter of an hour, when Wadden was gone. White breathed a little, and lived about twenty minuets.
 
 Cross-examined.— White spoke angrily. Jane Smith was not there at first. Would not swear Wadden said, "If he had not I hit me with the poker I should not have done it." He might have said that. Mr. Leeson, surgeon, of Sandown, went to Apse Heath and j saw White's body lying against the bank. He examined it. ! White was quite dead from a* wound, having been stabbed to the heart. The wound was an incised punctured one. It was j five inches deep and an inch in length. The knife produced would cause such a wound. I Police-constable Walter Knott said he was on duty at the Island, and went to prisoner's cottage that evening, about ' half-past 8 o'clock. He was at home, undressed all but his drawers. Witness said he wanted to speak to him. Wadden asked what was the matter. Witness told him to dress ; he did so. He searched him and found a knife (produced), having blood upon it. There was blood on the trousers and round his frock. He charged him with the murder. Wadden said he j should not have done it if White had not struck him across I the shoulder with an iron bar. He thought anyone was : allowed to stand in their own defence on the high road.
 
By the Judge. — Witness did not examine the prisoner' a : shoulder to find the marks of a blow. William Loe, keeper of the Lake turnpike, on the evening of the murder saw prisoner in custody, and took care of him while the policeman had his supper. Prisoner said it was a bad job and he did not think it was coining to this when he left home. He supposed they would hang him. He had bought some eggs at a shop for his breakfast, and in going home he asked for Smith's child. (He said she used to draw his pension money ) He found the child in clothes and shoes. He said, " I've done it, and meant to have done it." He presumed it would be brought in self-defence, as White struck him first with a poker. Cross-examined.— He never mentioned where he wag struck. Superintendent J. Campbell got the iron bar produced from Jane Smith. It somewhat resembled a poker. He examined the prisoner's shoulder and found no mark. Cross-examined. — The examination took place on Monday. The prisoner's statement was to the effect that he did it in self-defence. Dr. Leeson, recalled, said a blow given with the bar, if with any force, would have been visible on the following Monday. If a man had a thick coat on of course it would make a difference. The mere weight of the bar would create a mark. Mr. Bullen said it was extremely painful to him, as |no doubt it was to them, that this case involved the ate or a fellow creature. His pain was alleviated by tne conviction that upon the evidence adduced they could not convict prisoner of having wilfully, and with malice aforethought, taken the life of the deceased. He mi JJ™.iS to weigh the circumstances without allowing any ?£ mp >K y .? r - th ® ?°° r man whose "fe had been token to inter- ?? J^K™ 6 ?? There evidently was no good feel- ing between the men.. Language of no very temperate descnp - Sv-XS'Sf-H ?? to Madden, who _T answer to it said. ?? r-™i nlnS 7 w°£ This ?? have been made in 00d - Wadden remained in the road, but White ?? w 7, J£ h 8 conduct tp Jane Smith, and the seizing of the ?? * ?? A c "P 8 * "S* onb of the way, Jane ; that of ww_ d 9_~ * ■?_ he (P^oner), whose age was 60, and wa^nL W -_^f 9 ' w . as ther e f ore justified in believing that it n?t _2S^_fZ _# _S"™«t him in self-defence. Prisoner did ?? the man : he was in tear of his life, and ?? i£_i m 3elf - de fence. He was found at home undressed. w_M -SSSL- ma ? who knew he had committed a murder Ha «nh^_? c .v and . quietl y audress himself in that manner, blood therefore ' that wheH a fl S ht took place in hot °5* n(i ei "rer was killed, the crime was manslaughter, ami hSsfw_ He could "86 nothing more on the prisoner's -WtL H ® waa 8u ? e ' h °wever, if they had a doubt they would give the prisoner the benefit of it. ?? ifi^K 8 *^ 1116 Priaooer was charged with having with wf£?.q forethought and designedly killed William White. All nr.«vi» Jir 8 W !? Pnma facie murders , and it rested on the person if 2-w? 8 _£ homicide to show such reasons as to red«ce __!£?£ £ self-defence or manslaughter. Where a life was w£S_J^ hot bl00d » Bach Mto * quarrel or in a passion, and £«*?<«« were used, the crime, allowing for human infirmity, £-* reducable to manslaughter. Had there not in this case been some slight evidence of feeling anterior to the quarrel.
