# Murser Lacey Ryde Old House Farm

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000170/18610223/012/0003
Isle of Wight Observer - Saturday 23 February 1861

THE MURDER AT OLD HOUSE FARM.
 
 TO DO
 
 On Sunday morning last the inhabitants of Ryde and its districts were painfully excited by hearing the tale from mouth to mouth that "Farmer Lacey," of Old House farm, had murdered his wife by throwing her down stairs and otherwise maltreating her. As will be seen by the evidence, Dr. Ollard was the first to bring the news into Ryde and to inform the police. Directly Sergeant King received the intelligence he, accompanied by P.C. Smith, 58, proceeded to the scene of the tragedy, and with praiseworthy precaution mildly accosted Lacey by asking him the question which will be found in the evidence. Lacey was the first to make the attack by hitting the constable with both fists whilst the Sergeant was engaged in interrogating Susan Wilder, a niece of Mrs. Lacey) and when the constable was holding him on the floor, during the time a fly was procured, Lacey declared that if he knew they had been coming and their intention he would have had a gun ready receive them. A gun was afterwards found loaded with three ounces of large shot. On Monday morning T. T. Fowke, esq., and T. M. Leacock, esq., magistrates, proceeded to the station, where Lacey was in custody, and formally remanded him. the same morning Susan Wilder was apprehended on suspicion of being an accessory and accomplice in the murder. She was brought up to have a hearing, and remanded until Saturday, when she will be again brought up, and doubtlessly discharged, and bound oveT to appear and give evidence against Lacey, her uncle, at the next Assizes, to be held at Winchester, and which will commence on the 28th instant. 
 
 THE CORONER'S INQUEST.
 
  On Monday afternoon inquest was held on the body of Mrs. Lacey at the Farm-house, before P. Blake, esq., Coroner for the Isle of Wight. The names of the jurymen are—James Hunt (foreman), Thomas Dennis, John Meader, Henry Jollifle, William Bull, David Smith, William Brown, William Merwood, James Cook, Henry Jackman, James Scott, Alfred Tutte, and Henry Morris. Mr. Cooper, solicitor, attended to watch the inquiry on behalf of Mr. Lacey and Susan Wilder. There were a large assemblage of persons about the farm during the day as might be expected, all forming opinions and conjectures, or narrating the career, habits, and exploits of the suspected murderer. The jury having viewed the body, Priscilla Young was the first witness examined. She deposed: I live with my husband, George Young, at Oakfield. I knew the deceased, Mrs. Lacey. She was the wife of Henry Lacey, of Old House farm, in the parish of St. Helen's. last saw Mrs. Lacey alive on Saturday last, about 9 o'clock in the evening. had been at the farm all day to stay with Mrs. Lacey, While Mr. Lacey and Susan Wilder (Mrs. Lacey's neice) went to Newport. No one lived the house beside those three. Mr. Lacey and Susan went away to go to Newport, about half-past 9 on Saturday morning, in a dog cart. Mrs. Lacey was then in bed. I saw Mr. Lacey up stairs before he went away j I believe ta dress. did not hear anything pass between him and his wife. remained in the house all day afterwards, until 9 in the evening. Mr. Lacey and Susan returned home about 7. He was drunk, but Susan is a stranger to me and I cannot say whether or not she was the worse for drink, but I did not notice anything in her conduct when she came home different from that when she went away. Mrs. Lacey did not get up during the day. When Mr. Lacey returned he did not stairs while was there, but sat down in a chair. I did not say anything about his wife. Susan having paid me for being there, according to Mr. Lacey's instructions, went home and left them both in the room down stairs. Mrs. Lacey had been better during the day, and she told me she was better when first I came in the morning. Ido not know what she was suffering from, but she told me she had kept her bed for three months. I saw her and wished her goodbye just before I left in the evening. She seemed then she had been all day—much better. I have had no opportunities of noticing the conduct of Mr. Lacey towards his wife. The next morning (Sunday), about quarter to 8,1 brought some bread to the house, Susan and Mr. Lacey had desired me. I knocked at the door, and Susan came down to me and said, "My aunt is dead, Mrs. Young." I said, "Never." She said she was, and fell down stairs in the night. She then told me to go up and see her. did, and found her lying on the bed where I left her the night before. She was dead, and had on a clean night gown, but did not notice whether it was the same as that she had on in the evening when I left, I was frightened. Mr. Lacey was sitting in a chair by the fire, crying. I had not seen him at all until I went into the room. He said to me, "They say my wife is a corpse, but she is not." He asked me to go up stairs and see. When came down again he was sitting in the same place. He said, "She isn't dead; bring her down stairs and put her in my arms; she has been good wife to me. He had then only his trowsers, shirt, stockings, and slippers on. I did not take notice whether he was then drunk or sober, was so frightened. I had no further conversation with him, and did not see him outside. When Susan told me her aunt had fell down stairs she did not tell me how, but told me to go and ask Russell, the carter, if the doctor was coming immediately. went to Russell, and then came back and assisted Mrs. Corney in laying Mrs. Lacey out. Mrs. Lacey had on a night gown, a chemise, and a flannel, all of which appeared to be quite clean. Susan said she put them on that morning; her uncle made her. I helped in taking off deceased's things, and washing her. Susan said she had washed her before when she put her in bed. She said, when her uncle threw her down stairs she took her up and carried her up stairs again. She told me this in the afternoon. When we took off deceased's clothes, observed some bruises on her face and on the side of her left knee. I did not see any blood upon her person. Susan first told about her uncle throwing her aunt down stairs in the afternoon.
  
  By the Foreman.—I was never in the house before. I do not think she was capable of getting out of bed and walking. During Saturday I helped her several times to sit up in bed, as she was unable to do herself, and propped her up with pillows. She appeared to be very weak, and I do not think she could have walked the bed to the stairs.
  
  By a Juror.—I took some linen home. The sheets which we took out were stained with blood, and Susan asked me to take them home and wash them. I had not been in the habit of washing for Mrs. Lacey. There were few spots of blood on the counterpane. The flannel waistcoat she was wearing was also spotted a little with blood. I heard her make complaint on Saturday, and did not then observe any bruises her body. Charlotte Corney was next called, and deposed—I am he wife of William Corney, of Oakfield, but I live housekeeper brother at St. John's. I have known Mrs. Lacey for about 3 years. She has been in a very delicate state of health during that time. Mr. Lacey, her husband, told inc yesterday (Sunday) she had been bed for eleven weeks. I last saw her alive on week, the Bth instant. Dr. Ollard then came for ne, Mrs. Lacey wished to see me. I found her in >ed. When I entered the room, she said, " Oh, Mrs. Forney, see how lam ill-treated; Mr. Lacey and Susan lave been gone ever since 9 o'clock, and have not returned yet." I think it was then about half-past 3. she asked me if I was in her place, and situated, what would do ? I said I should send Susan home, 'he said her husband kept her penniless, and since she lad been laid up bed would not let her have any money at all. She also said they had left her one day before in the same manner. She said nothing more, as Mr. Lacey came home soon afterwards. did not meet him. I saw him come into the yard in a dog-cart, ind as he appeared to be drunk I wished to avoid him, ind so left the house before he came in. did not then tee Susan. have been told that about 2 years ago he turned the deceased Mrs. Lacey out of doors all night. [ have often been to work at the house before Mrs. Lacey was ill, and had no opportunity of seeing them together, but never witnessed any ill-treatment from to her either in word or deed. On Sunday morning last I was sent for about half-past 7 to go to Mr. Lacey's house. I met him in the garden. He said, ' Mrs. Corney, Mrs. Lacey is dead—I believe she is." [ did not answer him; I was too much frightened. He not then perfectly sober. He said, Mrs. Lacey was rather jealous of Susan and him, and was coining down stairs and fell down he also said he was as innocent is a child—as innocent as I was—and hadn't done anything. He then said, "Make haste in and see, and and tell me she is not dead." He did not then lay any more, but led me into the house by the hand, ind there said, " Here, Susan, is Mrs. Corney." I went up stairs with Susan and Mr. Lacey, and found Mrs. Lacey lying on the bed dead. He told me to tell lim she was not dead. said could not yet, but if le would get me a looking-glass would try. Susan 'etched me piece from her room and I held it over Mrs. Lacey's mouth, and found life to be left. I :old him so, but he would have it she was not dead. Susan told me that she was coming down stairs and fell down, and that she came down, her up, and carried her stairs again, put her into bed, and bathed ler temples with warm water. I asked her if she knew when her aunt died, and she said about half-past 6. She lid not tell me what time it was when she took her up stairs. I tied deceased's mouth up with a handkerchief, went home, and returned to the house and laid deceased out. I, assisted by Mrs. Young, took her things off, consisting of a night-dress, clean flannel, chemise, night-cap and stockings. The chemise was :lean, and the night-cap, excepting one little spot of blood the frill, but cannot answer for the state of :he other things. There were few blood stains on the pillow-slip and flannel, and a little on the under sheet, 3ut did not observe any elsewhere. Mrs. Lacey was very much bruised on the face, neck, and chest, and :here were several scars on her legs. the afternoon, when I returned to the house, Lacey had been taken away, and told Susan it would be better if she told (he truth. She then said her uncle took her aunt out if bed and threw her down stairs, that she took her up, carried her up again, and asked her uncle if he was going to kill her. She said that her uncle then knocked ler down three times, and that he took her aunt out of led again and threw her over the other side of the bed. She gave me the flannel, and I gave it to the police* nan. She said I could wash it and use it for patching.
  
  By Mr. Cooper.—I do not know whether not policeman was there when she told me this. Juror.—I noticed only one spot of blood on the floor, and told Susan to wash it up as it looked very jad. I did not observe any blood on the stairs.
  
  At this stage of the proceedings the inquisition was adjourned to the Oakfield Tavern, Oakfield. The jury being again assembled, the inquiry was returned by examining
  
  Sergeant King, who said—I went to Old House farm yesterday morning (Sunday), between 10 and 11 o'clock. The door was open, and I went in and met Mr. Lacey, vho was coming towards the door. Susan was there litting by the flre. I said, "Good morning, Mr. Lacey, lira. Lacey died suddenly to-night, did she not?" He made no answer. I then asked him her name. He numbled something, but I could not tell what. went across to Susan Wilder and asked her Mra. Lacey's lame. She told me, and I had scarcely put it down in ny book when I heard Lacey strike the constable who was with me very violently; at the same time he began iswearing, and said, " your eyes, go out of my louse." He then began to be extremely violent, and use very bad language. I took hold his right arm ind the other constable his left, and sat him down a :hair. He was still very violent, and while we were itruggling with him Drs. Ollard and came into the room. We got him on the floor and handcuffed him. Lacey was very drunk—mad drunk. Leaving a constable with Laeey, Dr. Ollard, Dr. Pinaiger, and myself went stairs. Dr. Ollard asked 3us an several questions, and I told her she had better be careful what she said. He asked her how Mrs. Lacey came with that bruise on her face. She said it was where her uncle struck her with his fist. She then said threw her out bed twice on to the floor, ind she shewed us the place where she pitched. There were a few marks of blood on the floor, but the floor was wet if it had recently been washed. I asked who scrubbed the floor, and she said she did it herself. asked her where the bed clothes were, and she said they were taken into Canada. I asked her if the whole was there, and she said yes. Previous to Susan saying Lacey had thrown deceased out of bed, she said he had thrown her down stairs, and that she had got her and put her in bed again. I asked her what time happened, and she said it first commenced between 10 and 11. She also said that some little time after she went in again and bathed Mrs. Lacey's eye where it had been cut open. Susan was sober at the time she said this. I then came into Ryde, procured a fly, and returned and took Lacey into custody. I received this counterpane from Mrs. Young, also these two pillow slips, stained with blood. This flannel and chemise, also stained with blood, I got from Mrs. Corney, ere is a sheet and two petticoats, but no blood on them. There is one spot of blood on this night-cap. Here is another chemise, slit down the middle, and a towel. I also got these two sheets from Mrs. Young they look as if they have been washed out in some places. asked Mrs. Young if she washed it, and she said no, they were just the same when she brought them away from the house. This shirt, I believe, belonged to Mr. Lacey. received it from Mrs. Young, at the house. was then stained with blood, as it is now. When I got to the station searched this bundle ol clothes for the bed-gown and night-cap, and could not find any except those produced as clean. I went back the house last evening and told Susan there was nc night-cap in the bundle, and she said it was there, all was taken away together. She said nothing more about it then. Upon this I began to search the house, and on turning back the mattrasses of the bedstead on which Susan sleeps I saw something rolled up, and found it to be this bedgown, stained with blood. asked her if it was hers, and she said " Yes." I said it looked very like the one described as belonging to Mrs, Lacey, and the one she was wearing on Saturday. Sh< said, " O yes, so it is: it is the one she had on on Saturday night." asked her how she could account foi its being under her mattrass? She sa'd she didn't know, Mr. Lacey had been in and out of the room several times during the night. continued the search, and on a shelf, in the milk-house, found this part of another shirt, also spotted with blood. As I could not find the other night-cap anywhere, I asked Susan if she knew where it was ? She said she saw Mr. Lacey with it in his hands, against the drawers, down stairs, but she did not know what he had done with it. have not been able to find it yet. By Juror.—I asked who slept with deceased. Susan said Mr. Lacey; he always sleeps with her. John Farmery Ollard was next examined, and made the following statement: am a surgeon and reside Ryde. have known deceased for two years or more and have attended her frequently during that time. have attended her for the last four or five months continuously. She was suffering in the first instance from inflammation of the bowels, and subsequently debility. last saw her alive on Friday last, the 15th inst., in th( afternoon. She was then better, and I recommended her being removed from the house altogether, as was not properly attended to, and Mr. Lacey's conduct had the effect of continually exciting her and making her worse than she would otherwise have been. Som( six months ago I was sent for in consequence of an injury she had received from his kicking her. I had conversation with him then and afterwards on the subject of his ill-treating her, and he did not deny it. gave as a reason for kicking her that she was familial with other men, but he evidently said so for the sake o making an excuse. He was never unkind to her in m; presence, but she frequently complained to me of hii being so. The conduct of Susan Wilder towards her so far as I could judge, was always very proper. When I saw her on Friday there was nothing dangerous in thi state of her health; on the contrary, she was improving, and herself said if she could get away to a cottage she would soon be well. I did not see her on Saturday. On Sunday morning, about half-past 7, I was sen for. I went to the house, and on entering the kitchen found Lacey there half drunk. He said, " Mrs. Lacey is dead." I replied, "Indeed, when did it happen?' He said, "She fell down stairs in the night." I mad no remark, but proceeded up stairs, and he followed me. I found Susan, Mrs. Corney, and another woman in the room where Mrs. Lacey was lying. Having looked the body, said, " Susan, how did this hap pen?" She said, " Mrs. Lacey got up iu the night am fell down stairs." Ito that said, "It no use telling me such a tale a.s that; was there any quarrelling last night?" She said, "Oh, no; they went bud comfortable as possible." I told her I could not believe it. Lacey was in the room, and wished to get him down stairs in order to question the women. I asked him, but he would not go. I then said to Susan, "Go into the garden, and I will follow you." She went, and followed, Lacey directly afterwards following me. I told him must speak to Susan alone. objected, got into a passion, and said what was fit for Susan to hear was fit for him. I again tried to persuade him to go into the house, when he took hold of Susan, and with considerable force pushed her from the garden into the paved court-yard, close to the back door. He then went in and banged the door in my face. I thought it would be hardly safe, and of no use, for me to longer stay, and left, and went the police-station at Rydc. During the time I was up stairs, he would not allow me to make any other but superficial examination of the body. Just before I left, he said, "X am innocent, and you know I am." I had made no charge, nor said anything to call forth such remark. I returned to the house, accompanied Mr. Pinniger, about 11 o clock. Lacey was then struggling with the police constables. went up stairs and examined the body. 1 found cut over the right eyebrow. Both eyes were very much blackened, and blood partly washed off and partly matted over the right temple. The left side of the face was very much swollen and bruised ; the chin was also much bruised, and the nose rather flattened and excoriated at the tip. The skin was rubbed off a little on both cheeks, and there were several bruises and abrasions over the body, thighs, legs, and particularly the knees. When first I saw her, I thought she had been dead three or four hours. The injuries, I think, were occasioned by blows ; but the cut over the eyebrow was caused, most likely, by a fall against some sharp edge. After I saw these injuries, said to Susan, "Now, tell me the truth how was this done? Did your uncle beat her?" At first, she said, "I did not see him strike her ; she tumbled down stairs." I then said, "He evidently has done so ; you must have heard it." She then said, "They went to bed comfortable enough, but after they had been a-bed some time I awoke and found him beating her. I ran out to see if I could find help, and when I came back she was lying on the stairs. I picked her up and sat her on the bed, but he knocked her off twice. I put her on the bed again, and got some water and bathed her temples."- I here asked Susan if Mrs. Lacey, her aunt, spoke ? She replied, "She said 'Oh, Susan, bathe my head,' and that was all. After bathing her I went to bed, and left lt® r , and Mrs. Lacey in bed together. He was then kissing her. In the morning, uncle called me, and said, Oh, Susan, I can't make your aunt speak; come.' went ,?nd found her rattling the throat, and then she died. I asked her what time this happened, and she said between and 6. I said, "Why did you not send to me sooner?" She replied, "I sent soon, but you have been so long coming." It struck me (witness), when I saw the body, that her clothes had been changed. made post mortem examination of the body this morning, about twenty-eight hours after death. The external surface had not altered, except that the bruises had become more apparent. The swelling of the left cheek had subsided, and the eyes were very much bloodshot. I examined the head, in conjunction with Mr. Pinniger, and found the internal surface of the scalp extensively congested, corresponding with the external removing the skull, there was a considerable profusion of bloody serum under the membrane which covers the brain, he substance of the brain was healthy, but the vessels on the surface were very much injected. The ventricles were filled with bloody serum. examined the thorax, •nd found the lungs and heart healthy, but a fatty enlargement of the liver. The stomach was healthy, but somewhat distended with fluid and undigested food. The other organs were all healthy. have no doubt that death was the result of the shock to the nervous system from the violence used and the Injuries received, accelerated by previous debility and indisposition.
  
  The Foreman.—Do you think it possible that the woman may have been beaten in bed, and from terror and excitement jumped out of bed, and then fell down stairs ? Dr. Ollard.—No; I do not think she was in state to do so; and if she wag, the cut over the eye would not be caused by a simple fall. Violence must have been used to cause such a wound. Susan Wilder, who had been taken into custody, was now brought in, and after being cautioned by the coroner as to her pleasing herself whether or not she would make any statement, declined so doing, although having no one to advise her. Mr. Broome Pinniger was next examined, and said I accompanied Dr. Ollard on his second visit to Old House farm on Sunday last and examined the body, observing all the injuries him described, and am quite of the same opinion as him as to their cause. I assisted Mr. Ollard this morning in making a post mortem examination of the body, and quite agree with all he said relative to that examination. I believe that death was earned by the violence of the injuries received on a body so debilitated, and could see nothing to account for death by natural causes. By a Juror.—Probably the injuries would not have resulted in death if inflicted more healthy person ? The Coroner.—ln reference to that question I may as well at once dispose of that by saying that it does not in the least affect the verdict, whatever it may be you return. If anybody accelerates the death,-in any way, of a person not in a sound state of health it is viewed in the same light by the law as if that person's health was good and sound. The Coroner now summed up, and in going through the evidence ably pointed out the most important features adduced. The room was now cleared, and after about an hour's deliberation, the jury returned a verdict in accordance with the medical evidence, of "Wilful Murder against Henry Lacey."
  
  EXAMINATION OF SUSAN WILDER.
  
  On Tuesday, at noon, Susan Wilder, having been taken into custody as an accessory, was brought before T. T. Fowke, esq., and T. M. Lcacock, esq., in the Victoria-hall. Long before 12 o'clock an immense crowd had assembled in St. Thomas's-square and Lind-street, and when the doors of the Court were opened the hall was soon filled by about as disorderly a set as ever entered the precincts of the court. Not content with scrambling for front seats and standing, instead of sitting in order and decorum, they mounted upon the seats and even on the backs, making perpetual disturbance, bustle, and buzz. The prisoner being brought into court and charged in the usual way, Priscilla Young was called and examined, but nothing fresh was elicited, her evidence being exactly the same that given at the inquest. Dr. Ollard and Sergeant King were next called, their examination being merely a recapitulation of their former evidence. The Bench having informed the prisoner that they should not now call upon her to make a defence, remanded her until this day (Saturday.) She was accordingly removed to Newport. The prisoner, Henry Lacey, since he has been in custody at times grew extremely violent, at the same time being apparently quite unconscious of the terrible crime he had committed. policeman has been with him night and day, up to Wednesday night, when it was thought prudent to have two, the night previous, in a paroxysm of delirium, he destroyed some of the fixtures the cell in which he is confined. lie speaks but very little, and generally if he were amid and directing the duties of his farm. On Thursday morning he became conscious for the first time, and remains so up to the present time. Several reports are in circulation respecting the monetary concerns of the prisoner—one being that he lately backed a bill of £300 for a neighboring farmer, but we know this to be contrary to the truth, and that he has claim whatever on the farmer in question. Of his late intemperate habits there can be no doubt, and the continuous drinking of ardent spirits had so affected his mind that his own labourers had for some time regarded him as being a little deranged. Lacey is a man of gigantic proportions and strength, and numerous are the stories related of feats of strength he has accomplished, and of desperate attacks he has made upon persons when under the influence of drink, and his easily excited combativeness. married about 19 years ago, but not through, as it is said, an advertisement a newspaper emanating from the woman whom he afterwards married. He had several hundred pounds by this marriage, and by the sum was enabled take Old House farm, consisting of about 100 acres. The farm is pleasantly situated the rise of dell, the surrounding scenery being delightfully picturesque. The farm also commands an extensive sea view across Springvale, and is situated about a mile and a half from Ryde on the Brading road, looking towards Westridge house, which stands about a quarter of mile to the south. Lacey was much younger than his wife—her age being G3 years and his 52. There was also quite contrast their size—she being "one of the smallest of her sex," and the time of her untimely death licr frame was so emaciated and thin, chiefly from the want of common nourishment and attention, that her bones seem to be covered but by thin transparent skin. Russell, the carter, who came into Ryde in the first instance for Mr. Ollard at the request of Lacey, has not yet been examined, but will be on Saturday. He, with another labourer, occupied two rooms detached from the farm house a few yards. On Saturday evening he was at the farm when returned 7 o'clock. It appears that he afterwards left and did not return until 1 o'clock Sunday morning, when all be quiet as usual. As the injrn i>._' ane d, .- ii.icwhen about 7 o'clock, to the door of the
 
  apartment where he was sleeping, woke him up, and desired him go into Ryde for Mr. Ollard. He did not then see Lacey, as he never entered the room, but stood without the door and called to him.


https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000170/18610302/013/0003
Isle of Wight Observer - Saturday 02 March 1861

THE MURDER AT OLD HOUSE FARM. EXAMINATION OF HENRY LACEY AND SUSAN WILDER. On Wednesday last, at 11 o'clock in the forenoon, Henry and Susan Wilder were brought up in the Victoria-rooms. There were present on the Bench, Capt. R. G. Duff (chairman), Thomas Thorp'fe Fowke, esq., Thomas M. Leacock, esq., and R. C. Sheddon, %ie hall was densely crowded throughout the day, the policemen having the greatest difficulty in keeping the crowd from pressing forward on the space apportioned to the Bench. Mr. Beckingsale appeared for Susan Wilder; Mr. Cooper for Henry Lacey. The prisoners having been duly charged, Dr. Ollard was first called, and repeated the evidence he gave on Monday and Tuesday last. On being cross-examined by Messrs. Cooper and Beckingsale, stated that Mrs. Lacey'a mind was in no way affected. When called, whether Lacey or Susan was at home or not, I had acc«ss to the house. It is necessary to through Lacey's room to into Susan's. I was in the habit of attending Mrs. Lacey every other day, but not generally see Lacey. I aaw him perhaps a dozen times, perhaps not so many, within the month prior to Mrs. Lacey's death. On those occasions he was generally intoxicated. Sergeant King was next called, and gave the same evidence on the two previous occasions, excepting the following!— Since Lacey has been in custody he has been very ill. Thursday last he was much better, and as soon I saw he conscious I told him he was in custody charged with the murder of Mrs. Lacey, his wife. Mr. Cooper here entered objection against such evidence being received, unless in the presence of Dr. Ollard, as he was certain Lacey was not in a state of mind at the time fit to make any statement. Dr. Ollard having again entered the Court, Sergeant King continued.—He was calm and collected when none but ourselves were with him. When I told him what he waa in custody for, he made no remark. On Friday afternoon gave one of the constables directions for going to Newport with Susan on the following day. This was against the door of the cell in which Lacey was confined, and he might have heard what I said inside. On Saturday morning I went to give him his breakfast, *hen, without ray speaking, he commenced: " When I went up stairs I asked my wife whether any one had been there that day She said there had—two men. said, that was quite enough far me. I caught a man with her about ten years ago. I then took her in my arms and struck her three times across the eyes with my hand, and that was how her eyes became black. beat her head on the floor twice when I had her out of bed. I put her back in bed, covered her up, and went and got into bed with Susan. woke about 12 o'clock, and went in to Mrs. Lacey. She asked me to get into bed with her. I did, and kissed her several times. She said, perhaps it will be the last time you will sleep with me. I laid with her some little time, and asked her whether I had hurt her much? She said, 'No, not much.' After this I went and got into bed again with Susan. About 3 o'clock I went in to Mrs. Lacey again, and desired Susan to or send for Dr. Ollard. Susan said, 'Oh, no, let her stay until the morning, till it gets daylight.' Bhe died between 6 and 7 o'clock." I made no remark to what he said first last. He was perfectly sensible at the time he told me this. He said, " I struck her like this " (clapping his hands). When I first went to the house, Susan pointed out to me where Mrs. Lacey had been thrown out of bed on to the floor. On the spot were some marks of blood. Mr. Beckingsale now cross-examined this witness respecting the bed clothes, &c., and the manner of Susan, but nothing any importance was elicited. Dr. Ollard waa re-called, and said: on Thursday last I do not think the prisoner Lacey was in a fit state to receive a charge. On Saturday he was to some extent conscious, but not entirely. I saw him after breakfast on that day, and not think he waa capable of making any statement or answering any questions. He had been suffering during the week from *delirium tremens*. Priscilla Young was next called, and gave the evidence as given by her at the inquest In the course of her evidence she said that Dr. and Mrs. Lowder had called during the day to see Mrs. Lacey. On being cross-examined by Mr. Beckingsale, she said that Susan said her uncle told her to tell people her aunt fell down stairs; and that when Susan came home she brought some oranges for Mrs. Lacey, with which ahe was much pleased. Mr. Fountain gave evidence concerning some pen-and-ink outlines he had made of the farm buildings, and stated the door of the room, where the carters slept, was about 45ft. from the outer door of the farm house. Mrs. Corney was next examined, making statements the same as those made at the inquest. After Mr. Cooper had put some questions to this witness, Mr. Beckingsale aid the same, but without any important result. William Russell, said—I am carter at Old House farm. The name of the other carter is Fred Nicholas. We sleep at the cottage, that is, a room at the end of the house where Lacey lives. Part of the building is used cellar to the house. There is another room adjoining, and then the room where we sleep, to which there no outer door. We get to the room by coming through the other room, where there is door whi«h opens into the yard. A person coming from Lacey's house must either come through the court-yard or else through the garden. The distance of our room is about 16 yards from the front door of the house. On the night of the 16th February I and Nicholas came home together about a quarter to 1. To get our room, we went across the farm yard. There was a light burning in the room where Mrs. Lacey slept. I heard no one moving the house. About a quarter to 7 master came to the outer door of the room, and said, " Russell, get up and go for the doctor at once, Mrs. Lacey is ill, and I do not know one minute from another whether she will live. I said I would. Lacey had not been gone above a minute when he came back again, and said, " Russell, go in a minute, Missus been and fell down stairs." I did not see him either time, but knew his voice. I went immediately to Mr. Ollard. I neither saw nor heard anyone moving about when I came home. I heard no one call in the night. Neither the doors of the rooms where I sleep were fastened. By Mr. Beckingsale.—The windows of my bedroom look away from the house altogether. I sleep pretty sound at times. Frederick Nicholas.—I have worked at Old House farm about three months. I came home with Russell on the night of the 16tli of February about quarter to 1. saw a light in through a window of one of the upstairs rooms. I did not see anyone moving in the house. I was not disturbed at any hour of the night. I got up when Russell was called. Lacey came out in the courtyard and called me, saying, " You after Mrs. Corney; Missus is either dead dying." Russell had then been gone about half-an-hour. By Mr. Cooper.—Lacey was only dressed in his shirt when he called me. I did not notice whether«r not the shirt was clean. It was white rme. _ ' Joh: Mew.—I at the pits, in the parish of Bins tend. I know Henry Lacey. was work at the gravel pits on the afternoon of the 16th of February, about o'clock, in the high road between Newport and Ryde. I saw Lacey and the other prisoner going by in gig, up the hill. The horse was walking. saw Lacey kissing the woman, and taking other familiarities with her. I said nothing to him. By Mr. Beckingsale.—I was about four feet below the road, looking over the hedge. I was nearly at the top of the hill., There was gentleman passed by. 1 do not know whether or not he saw Lacey Kiss her.' The extent of the familiarities I saw waa his kissing her and putting his arm around her waist. Superintendent Campbell.—I went to Old House farm on the 17th of February, and put some questions to Susan Wilder. I asked her to tell me the particulars how it happened. There was not, at that time, any charge whatever against her. She said,'I heard noise in the night, and heard Mrs. Lacey say, " Oh, Susan! oh, Susan!" went out into her bedroom and found that Lacey had thrown my aunt down stairs. I went and picked her up and put her in bed again. My uncle knocked her out of bed twice. I asked him to let me and give the alarm, but he would not let me go near the window, and pushed me down two or three times. The magistrates having consulted for short time, Capt. Duff rose and said that Henry Lacey stood committed for trial for the wilful murder of Mrs. Lacey, and. also Susan Wilder as an accessory after fact, and for covertly concealing the same murder, at the Assizes, to be held at Winchester in the present month. The Court now broke up, having sat near seven hours. During the day Lacey bore a remarkably composed air; occasionally, however, casting look of displeasure and shaking his head at Susan Wilder, as every witness mentioned the fact of her having stated that he threw

REMOVAL OF HENRY LACEY AND SUSAN WILDER FROM RYDE TO WINCHESTER GAOL.

 These prisoners were removed on Thursday afternoon, in the custody of Sergeant King and P.C. Smith, crossing over from Ryde to Gosport by the 3.20 p.m. steamer; and thence by rail to Winchester. They, therefore, arrived at the assize town on the same day as the Judges. Lacey shook hands, and bid "good bye," to several of his friends and acquaintances on the Pier, and also expressed himself very confident that he should " soon come back." However, he made his will before his departure, according to the advice of his relatives, so it is said.

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000170/18610302/019/0004
Isle of Wight Observer - Saturday 02 March 1861

COUNTY PETTY SESSIONS. Satihdat.—Before Sir H, P. Gorden, bart. (chairman), Capt. Hamond, R.N., Oapt. Kerr, T. M. Leacock, jcsq., R. C. Sheddon, esq , and F. W. Popham, esq.

...

Susan Wilder was placed at the bar charged with being accessory to the murder of Mrs. Lacey by her husband, Henry Lacey, of Old House farm, near Ryde. Remanded to Wednesday, at Ryde. John Player, of Ryde, charged with trespassing in pursuit of game. Benjamin Bullock, gamekeeper to Mr. W. Nunn, said that more than a year ago he was in New Copse and heard the report of gun, and saw the defendant run from behind some hurdles Mr. Cooper's field and pick up a rabbit. The defendant expressed his regret it doing so, and said it was his first offence. Fined lCf., and 7s. 6d. costs.


https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000408/18610307/080/0011
Dorset County Chronicle - Thursday 07 March 1861

TRIAL FOR MURDER

At Winchester Assizes on Tuesday, before Mr. Justice Willes, *Henry Lacey* was indicted for the wilful murder of his wife, Jane Lacey, at St. Helen's, in the Isle of Wight, ou the 17th of February, The evidence *in extenso* of J. Ollard, Esq., surgeon at Ryde, proved that the cause of death was a shock to the system, the result of violence. The prisoner was kind to his wife when he was sober; he had fits of intemperance; sometimes he was sober for months. He was suffering from an attack of *delirium tremens*. That of Priscilla Young, William Russell, and Frederick Charlotte Corney, Nicholas, and others was to the same effect.—Susan Wilday, niece to Mrs. Lacey, said to the prisoner, "Oh, uncle, my aunt is dying; I am sure she is." He then went downstairs, He came back, and bade her wipe up the blood that was on the floor. He stood behind her while she wiped it up. He then told her to put some clean linen on his wife. At that time she had nothing on but her flannel waistcoat. Before Mre. Corney came he told her to say that Mrs. Lacey had fallen down the stairs.— Broom Pinniger, Esq., surgeon at Ryde, had seen prisoner on the Sunday, aad he was drunk then, On the Tuesday he was seriously ill, under *delirium tremens*. On Saturday, the 23d he answered rationally. The disease of mind arose from a drinking bout.—George Catchpoll went to the prisoner's on the Friday after the murder. He said, "I'll tell you all about it. About seven years ago I caught Mrs. Lacey in bed with another man, and I have been jealous of her ever since. On the Saturday night I was a little fresh. Two men had been to see her, and then I thought of old times. I pulled her out of bed, and gave her three slaps, one on the eye, which caused her to have a black eye, and one on the nose, which made it bleed."—Mr. Cole having addressed the jury for the prisoner, Mr. Justice Willes then summed up the case to the jury, showing what the law was as regarded the offences of murder, manslaughter, and insanity. Drunkenness was not an excuse for crime; murder could not be mitigated in consequence of drunkenness. The sin committed when a man was drunk he must answer for when he became sober. The jury retired for ten minutes, and then delivered a verdict of Guilty of Manslaughter. The prisoner was sentenced to six years' penal servitude.