## Nore Mutiny

---



---
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000230/17970527/017/0004

Hampshire Chronicle - Saturday 27 May 1797

TO DO

HOME NEWS. PORTSMOUTH. The mutiny among the seamen at Sheerness and the Nore has got to such a height as demands more vigorous measures than have yet been used. There has been enough concession, and the refractory seamen must be brought back to their duty by other than lenient and and palliative measures. The men board the Inflexible, of 64 pins, lyinging in Sheerness harbour determined to carry the ship to the Nore. The captain of the forecastle took the command, and they carried the ship out. In passing the St. commanded by Sir H. B. Neale, they fired a shot into her, because her men did not cheer them as they passed. Sir H. B. Neale-} to prevent more disagreeable and fatal consequences, desired his men to get upon the Shrouds and cheer. They did so in obedience to their captain, and perhaps some bloodshed was spared in consequence of the judicious conduct of this excellent officer. The seamen the Nore and the Downs have proceeded to acts of mutiny and violence which were not thought of in Lord Bridport's fleet. Almost all the officers of Stag frigate, are turned a Shore by the crew. They requested Capt Yorke to remain on board, but he thought proper to (bare the fate of his officers. Several other ships continue unfatufted, principally with different officers ; and several have been senr??? shore by the seamen, and not permitted to return to their ships. The seamen have not been guilty any personal disrespect to their officers on board ; they regularly perform the duties of the ; but it is greatly to lamented that even indifferent matters they do not fliew that obedience which they formerly used to do. One Heather, the Mars, who had assumed the title of Judge Advocate of the Fleet, has been tried for conspiracy, and correspondence with persons Portsmouth. having been discovered the fleet that an improper correspondence had been carried on, the boats of the Royal George and Queen Charlotte were appointed to keep a look-out on nights, if possible, to prevent it, and detect the author or authors; on the second night's watch, about twelve o'clock, they boarded a boat rowing from the Mars to the Duke, in which they discovered papers that were produced evidence, and proved the means of convctiug Heather, who was, in sentenced to hanged.— was afterwards at the request of his own Ship's company, reprieved; but ordered to receive two dozen lashes, which were inflicted. The following officers, understand, have resigned their commands in the Channel fleet: Captain Holloway, ofthe Duke; Captain Griffiths, of the London; Captain Nichols, of the Marlborough ; Captain Eaton, of the MeduSa; Captain Cook, of La Nymphe; Captain Miller, of Megaera ; Captain Barker, of the Incendiary ; and Captain Mowbray, of the Fly. The principle upon which they have fent in their resignation is, that they arc unwilling to run the riSk of experiencing a repetition of the insults lately offered to them. One of the lieutenants of the Repulse man of war has been promoted, at the recommendation of Admiral Duncan, for his spirited behaviour in resisting, with success, the late mutinous conduct of the crew of that ship at Yarmouth-' Tuesday, twenty«vx the laSt entered artificers were discharged from the dock-yard, without any previous notice whatever. This hidden order was occasioned through the appearance of discontent among the people reflecting the price of their labour. Lord Hugh Seymour, rear-admiral of the white, arrived the Sans Pareille, with the Triumph and Bedford line-of-battle ships, and le Revolutionnaire frigate, with a convoy from Plymouth. The Lords of the Admiralty have appointed Captain Honeyman, M. P. to the command of the TiSiphone floop of war on the North-Sea Station. Arrived the Hornet floop from a cruize. Monday, La JuSte, of 84, and Hector, of 74 guns, came into harbour from Spithead. Same day, the of 36 guns, failed out of harbour to Spithead. Also sailed the Plover floop, with a convoy for the Downs. The 88th regiment of foot embarked on board tranfports bound to Guernsey. A curious mutiny broke out a few days since on a taylor's Shop-board, in Oy er street. The journeymen, fourteen in 1 number, chafe two Delegates, feized on the Shears, goofe, and fleeveboards; but on Mr. Laing, the proprietor, being informed that the mutineers had got possession ofthe arms, he instantly complied with their demand, an increase of wages ; and subordination was happily restored without bloodshed. Plymouth, May 23. Notwithstanding that this is the third day that the Channel fleet has been off this port, endeavouring get down Channel, which circumstance alone, to every rational mind, is the surest indication of the crews of those ships being Satisfied with the mam: in which government have complied with their demands, yet the sailors at this port contin in the same mutinous state, cheering in the n ing and evening, and keeping the command of the mips. What will satisfy them, or when the business is to end, God only knows A number of sailors were ducked yesterday, for disobedience of orders. Five o'clock, P. M. are happy to say, that this moment Sir J. B. Warren has again resumed the; command of his in Cawfand Bay: as foon as he came alon ;fide, the sailors manned the Shrouds, and gave him three cheers, and on his getting on board, his broad pendant was hoisted at the main top-gallant-mast head, and the Pomone's colours fllifted from blue to red; the Artoie, Galatea, ad Sylph, inftantly Shifted colours', and the same time gave three cheers, fo that we have reason to hope that perfect order is once mon restored on board this squadron. That the fame may be adopted by every ship in this harbour, is the earnest wish of every one who has the safety the country at heart. Sheerness, May aj. The mutiny, which has long prevailed this port, has not yet subsided. The sailors are determined not to return to their duty until he arrival of the Lords of the Admiralty. A large bunch of blue and pink ribbands is univerfa ly worn by them their motto is, «« Sticccss to the Delegates of the Fleet/ Two regiments of militia arrived here last night, which the Such degree, that they inftant /.Seized upon the whole the gun-boats, and every to proceed to the most violent extremities.-—- They afterwards took them from the harbour to the Nore; and this morning they Struck the flag Adm. Buckner, on board the Sandwich, and hoisted a red one in its Stead, which was immediately answered all Ships at the Nore and in the harbour, except the Mary yacht. The Delagates informed the crew of this veflet that they did not with them to join in their combination, but insisted their giving them three cheers whenever they would pass one another. As there has appeared in our last an account of the death of Mr. SatT'ry, surgeon and agent for the sick and hurt at this place, which it was erroneously stated that Seamen went to his house for; purpose of hanging him, and that in a fit of fpair he cut his throat: in justice to the Seamen, we now state, that never went to his house, which is in the fon, for any purpose whatever ; and that their hearing of his having cut his throat, they expressed great sorrow, declaring, that if they disapproved of any thini; the business the sick quarters, they intended him no harm.

---


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Incitement_to_Mutiny_Act_1797
"The Incitement to Mutiny Act 1797 (37 Geo 3 c 70) was an Act passed by the Parliament of Great Britain. The Act was passed in the aftermath of the Spithead and Nore mutinies and aimed to prevent the seduction of sailors and soldiers to commit mutiny.[2]"
Royal assent	6 June 1797

----
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000235/17970609/011/0002

Kentish Gazette - Friday 09 June 1797

A BILL For the better Prevention and Punishment of Attempts to seduce Persons serving in his Majesty's Forces, by Sea or Land, from their Duty and Allegiance his Majesty, to incite them to Mutiny or Disobedience.

Whereas divers wicked and evil disposed persons, the publication of written or printed papers, and malicious and advised speaking, have of late industriously endeavoured to seduce persons serving in his Majesty's Forces by Sea and Land, from their duty and allegiance to his Majesty, and incite them to mutiny and disobedience. Be it enacted by the King's Most Excellent Majesty, by and with the advice and consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in this present Parliament asembled, and the authority of the same, that from and after the passing of this Act, any person who shall maliciously and advisediy endeavour to seduce any person or persons serving in his Majesty's Forces by Sea or Land, from his or their duty and allegiance to his Majesty, or to incite or stir up any such person or persons to commit any act of mutiny, or to make, or endeavour to make, any mutinous assembly, or to commit any traitorous or mutinous practice whatsoever, shall on being legally convicted of such offences, be adjudged guilty of Felony, and shall suffer death, as in cases of Felony, without benefit of Clergy.

Provided always, and be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, that any offence committed against this Act, whether committed on the High Seas, or elsewhere, shall and may be prosecuted and tried before any Court of Oyer and Terminer, or Goal Delivery for any County in that part of Great Britain called England.

And be it further enacted, by the authority aforesaid, that this act shall continue and be in force until the expiration of one month after the commencement of the next Session of Parliament, and no longer.

---


https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000235/17970606/016/0003

Kentish Gazette - Tuesday 06 June 1797


TO DO

*Answer from the Lords of the Admiralty to the Sailors at the Nore. (See a statement of their demands in our FRIDAY's paper.)*

To these demands, on the 22d of May, the Commissioners of the Admiralty replied:— That after the very liberal attention of his Majesty, in increasing the wages and provisions of the seamen and marines in his Majesty's service, their Lordships are extremely surprised to find the seamen and marines of his Majesty's ships at the Nore and Sheerness should be still in sa state of disobedience,

and bringing forward further requests to their Lordships therefore cannot accede to any such requests. With respect to the first Article, their Lordships declare, that all additional allowances of wages and provisions, and every other regulation announced at Portsmouth, have been eftaMithed by his Majesty’s Order in Council, and by Act of Parliament, and extended to all seamen and marines in his Majesty’s service. That with respect to the second article, the nature of the service in time of war does not admit of the men having leave to go to their families, except under very particular circumstances, of which the Captains or other superior officers alone can judge. That with relpv£f the third and fifth Articles, the ships company shall be paid in the manner poinhd out by the several of Parliament at present in foicc. With refpcfl to the fourth Article, all arrangements concerning the officers to be employed the fliips of the fquadron, mu ft he fettled by the Admiral or Commanding Officer for the time being. With respect to the sixth Article, if it should be his Majesty’s pleasure to pardon all who may have deferted from his fervice in the Navy, it muft be the effect of his Royal Ciemeacy alone, and not of any reqnilition ; that although their Lordships thought proper to to Portsmouth for the purport of obtaining more information of the grievances which the seamen and marines in general might have to tepiefent, and of adopting most expeditiously luch measures as might be necessary, and granting such further indulgencies as might render their situation more comfortable, and enable them better to provide for the fupport of their families, no fimilar reafons exifls for their taking such ftep the prefent occasion. Their Lordships therefore direfl, that it is to the officers that fliips’ companies are to look up, to whom their petitions are always to be prefented, and through whom their Lordfliips determinations a e to be expelled. It is their Lordships direflion, that, notwithstanding all that has passed before his Majesty’s most gracious pardon, and their Lordship’s order to ad officers, to bury in oblivion all that has patfed, are now offered, which (hould they be refufed, you will have anfwer for all the melancholy confequerces which muft attend their perfifting in the prerent Itate of disobedience and mutiny. After the Admital had delivered the foregoing letter to the Delegates of the fleet, they were allowed only ten minutes to confider and return an anfwer; in place of doing which they look to their boats, went into the harbour, and brought out all the gun boats there to the Great Nore; after they had paffed the garrifon of Sheernefs, the gunboats all fired at the for', not, as they fay, with an intention of doing any damage, but m.rely to (hew they were independent, and not in chead of the fort. The determination of the Delegates, in ccnfequence of the above aufwer from their was, that nothing could he fettled till three of the B. Admiralty came down to Sheernefs.” Op the 24th, the feamen received another letter, repeating the offer of pardon, to which the following anfwer was fern ; To the Lords Commiffioncrs for executing the Office of Lord High Admiral Great Britain and Ireland, &c. I am commanded by the Delegates the whole fleet affembled in Council, on board his Majesty’s (hip Sandwich, to inform your Lordships, that they have received your letter from Admiral Buckner, which informs them, that it is not your intention of coming to Sheernefs, the fame has been communicated to his Majesty’s ships and veffels lying here, and the determination of the whole is, that they will not come any accommodation, until you appear at the Nore, and redrefs our grievances. (Signed) Rich. Parker, Prefident. ** Bv order of the Committee Delegates of the whole fleet. His Majesty’s /hip Sandwich. May 25, 1757.’’ After the above was delivered, the Tailors refolved to place the different ships in a poftore of defence; and in order prevent any fu-piize, they, on the 25th inft. unmooied with the whole fleet, and moored again, formed into two lines of battle, with determination of oppofing any force that might be againft them. All thefe efforts on the pan of the Admiralty to bring the Tailors back their duty having failed of their intended effe£l, Government, refolved give them a full opportunity of returning to their duty, granting them one indulgence on which they feemed principally to fet their mind—that of having a Board Admiralty held Sheernefs, to which their Delegates might perfonally (fate their gi icvanccs. Accotdingly, on Saturday laft the Lords of the Admiralty (as we have formeily (fated) proceeded to that place; and, that no hindrance might artfe to a (peedy adjuftment, from fears that might be entertained of particular individuals, of being afterwards puni/hed for the (hare they might have had in the bofinefs, their Lordships carried with them a Proclamation, offering his Majesty’s free pardon, &c. This, however, failed effefl; fince which, another has b.en iffued, both which will appear this paper in the form one general inftrumenf. B T THE KING. A PROCLAMATION. For the Supptelfion of the Mutinous and Treafonablc Proceedings the Crews of certain of Our Ships at the Nore. George R. Whereas, upon the Reprefentation of our Lords Commiifioncrs of our Admiralty, the proceedings of the seamen and marines on board certain our /hips at the Nore, were pleafed to command our said Lord Commiffioners of our Admit ally, to fignify to the said feamen I marines, our gracious intentions, expreffed in oui Royal Declaration, under our fign Manual, bearing date at St. James’s, the 27th day of May inft. George R. (L.S.) Whereas it if has been reprefenied unto us that notwithltandmg the declarations made in our name and by our authority, our rds CommdTioneis of our Admiralty, of our gracious intentions 6 recommend to the confideration of Parliament, to augment the wages and allowances of leamen and marines of our fleet, which our gracious intentions and declarations have ftnce been carried into effect by Aft of Parliament; and notwitbftanding the communication made our right trulty and r ght wellbeloved Coufm and Counfellor Richaid Earl Howe, Admiral ot our fleet, of our gracious intentions towards the lesmen and marines of our fleet, for the pardon of the offences by them comm tted, and our Proclamation thereupon, bearing date the mh day of May inft. and notwithflandiug the fentiments of duty and gratitude with ch the fame were received by the seamen and marines of our othej fquadrons, yet the crews on board certain of our ships at the Nore have not only ftnee the full inanifellation all thefe our gractVus intentions and declarations, been guilty of divers afls of mutiny and disobedience of orders, but have even puoceeded to other a£ls of the moft heinous and treasonable nature, firing upon some of our ships, in order to compel them to submit to their direction ; have threa ened and taken measures for flopping the commeice of the kingdom, pafllug to and from the Port of London, and have by terror of their force, compelled two frigates to defift from executing a particular fervice, which by our order they were dhefted to perform. We think right to warn all our feamen and marines on board the ships, of the heinous nature of the oftences by them committed, and of the dangerous confequences thereof to {the fpirit and difeiplineofthe Britifh Navy, and the welfare of their country, as well as to their own fafety, hereby earneflly require and enjoin all our said feamen and marines immediately, on the notification of this our Royal Declaration, return to the regular difeharge of their duty, as has already been done by the crews of our other fquadion* and fl.-ets, flalioncd at Portfmouth and Plymouth, and clfewhere. And whereas are well allured, that a great part of the seamen and marines on board the said the Note ( 


HOUSE OF PEERS — Thursday, June 1.

Naval mutiny.

*Lord Grebvillie* presented a message from the King, relative to this very important subject.

[For which see the proceedings of the House of Commons]

*Lord Grenville* then laid a Copy of the Proclamation referredto on the  message, upon the table, and moved, "that his Majesty's most gracious message be taken into consieration tomorrow, and that their Lordships be summoned upon the occasion."--which was summoned accordingly.

...

HOUSE OF COMMONS

TO DO

...

MESSAGE FROM HIS MAJESTY.

Mr. Pitt brought down the following message from his Majesty :

 It is with the deepest concern his Majesty acquaints the House of Commons, that the conduct of the Crews of of his ships no wat the Nore, persisting in the most violent and treasonable acts of Mutiny and Disobedience, notwithstanding the full extension to them of all the benefits which had been accepted with gratitude by the rest of his Majesty's fleet, and notwithstanding the repeated offers of his Majesty's most gracious Faruon on their returning to their duty, have compelled his Majesty to call alt his faithful Subjects, to give their utmost assistance in re ii. ; f.ch dangerous and criminal proceedings. His Majesty has directed a copy of the Proclamation, which he has for this purpose, to be laid before the and he cannot doubt that his Parliament will adopt with readiness and decision every measure which can tend, at this important conjuncture, to provide for the Public Security And His Majesty particularly recommends it to the conlideration of Parliament, to make the more effectual provision for the preventing and punishment of all traitorous attempts to excite sedition and mutiny in his Majesty's service, or to withdraw any part of his Majesty's forces, sea or land, from their duty and allegiance to him, and from that obedience and discipline which are the prosperity and the of the British Empire." The being read from the chair, Mr. Pitt moved that his Majesty's be taken into consideration tomorrow. Mr. Sec. Dundas brought up the Proclamation of his Majesty, which on the motion of Sir John Sinclair, was read. [For which see the second Paged} Mr. Sheridan next rose, and said that he himself, and he was confident that the House would coincide with him, felt the deepest regret, at the melancholy intelligence just communicated to them in his Majesty's message. The present business was indeed a business of the highest importance, and of extreme delicacy, and, as such he deemed it is duty not now to offer any comments on it. It was, however, to him, matter additional regie', that the conciliatory proposition which he had been desirous to make, did not meet with the approbation of his Majesty's Ministers: for, he could not help thinking, that, had it been adopted, it would nave prevented the unfortunate perseverance of the Seamen in a state of insubordination and discontent. He must now say a word on the other part of his Majesty's Meifage, which recomm-nded to the House to proceed to the adoption of measures which should e .d to give greater vigour the laws. this would also abstain from commenting ; but, he begged leave to serve, at the same time, that his forbearing present offer comments on it, should not be construed into his giving it his assent. Mr. Pitt mod cordialiy commended v the great propriety with which the Hon. Gentleman abstained from making any premature remarks on the melancholy subject of the present communications nor was himself any means tempted to anticipate the observations which he might hereafter be inclined to offer on the more effectual means of preventing the progress of the evil under which we now laboured. He must, however, remind the House, and the Hon. Gentlemam (Mr. Sheridan), that the offence stated in the Message was of a nature to call for farther provifum give vigour the Law. For it was the most malignant, the most criminal, the most odious, and the most dangerous, which the heart of man could conceive, or the corruption and of man could attempt to execute. —The calamitous effects recently experienced from the unfortunate perseverance of the seamen in a state of disorder and discontnt—a perseverance that could have no other source but the foul insinuations of treachery, could not be more warmly characterised than they had been the Hon. Gentleman, when he said, that in compitifon of such??? a crime, the enormity of open treason faded away; and indeed all those who retain any veneration for Law and its salutary effects, must behold the crime in question as paramount in guilt to all other treasons, odious as they are—He therefore truded the House would proceed taking due measures to prevent a conduct which in guilt mud excite the utmost indignation and in importance, called for the utmost precaution which it was partible for the House to apply to it.

...

HOUSE OF COMMONS.— Friday, June i. Mr. Secretary Dundas moved for leave to bring bill, empowering his Majesty to raise and embody the Militia that part of Great Britain called Scotland.—Granted. A Meffagc fiom the Lords informed the House, that their Lordships concurred wirh the House to the means of im proving the promulgation of the laws, and had refolved uptjn Addiefs to his Majesty, in which they desired the concurrence of the House. The Meflengers having retired, were afterwards called in and informed, that the House would send an answer to thatpait of their Lordship’s Message which related the Address, by Messengers their own. It was then resolved, on the motion of Mr, Abbot, that the House would take the Message into consideration on Wednesday. His Majesty’s Message. The order of the day being moved for taking into consoderation his Majesty’s Message, The Chancellor of the Exchequer said, that, important a the prdent occasion was, and deep as must be the interest felt in it by the House, he did not think it his duty to trespass much upon their time in recommending the measure which hid to propose. The House learned from the Message, that the instances of his Majesty’s beneficence and paternal care, which have been dutifully and affectionately received by the Fleet in general, had produced on the crews of certain ships none of that effect which was reasonably to be expected from them ; that although pardon had been repeatedly offered to them, on condition of their returning to their duty, they still remained in state not only of mutiny, but of fuel) open and undisguised hostility, that they had fired other vessels, which were proceeding upon service agreeably to the orders of his Majesty. Much as thefe circumdances rauft be dep'ored, he had no doubt that the House would unanimoufly feel the duty of fhowihg, that no difficulties could arife which they would not meet with the firmuefs and decifion due to their own charatters, and to the fafety of the country, They would have no hefitation in carrying to the foot of the Tluonc the aflurances of that firmnefs and loyalty. He trufted, that while they felt and lamented the difficulty of the fituat'on in which they were placed, they would alfofeel indignition as to the means by which it had been produced. In proportion as the prefent condufl of any feamen was centra! y to that in which their own renown and the profperity of the country had hitherto consisted, in that proportion the House must see that it had not resulted from the genuine minds and dispositions of British seamen, and must feel it their duty to express a readings for passing such laws as would reftrain or punish any internal enemies, who might aim at sullying the chief glory of the country, or weakening the chief pillar of it's safety. In that proportion they must eager to take measures for counteracting any insidious incitements to mutiny and sedition. It was not now necessary to date full the nature of the measures which would be proposed to them but if the present Address should be carried, it was his intention movef oraß.il; and, in explaining the object of that, he would be more particular. That the offince complained of was frequen', need not fay ; it was praCtifed with an indudry, an art, and, in (' indsnees, with a boldness, which proved the Je p dcfigns thofe who perpetrated it. That the House had every ground which could required for the palling of any penal law, would not be doubted; it would be his duty only to Ihew that the remedy propofed was fuitable to the moral guilt and real malignity of the ciime. And, while Parliament was not wanting to the Public, the Public would not wanting to itfelr; every individual his fpliere, would contribute to the general cause and exertion, which was worthy of Englishmen, in order to feenre the bledings hitherto attached to that nime. Men would join together for the purpofe of national defenfe againft all enemies, external and internal. During the continuance of the crisis in which we were, the House would feel it their incelfant duty to he vigilant againft danger every fort. To say more upon the occasion would be to insult the honour of the House, and impeach the fidelity of the country ; and Ihouid have been wanting to his own feelings if he had laid lei’s. Mr. Pitt concluded by moving an Address to his Majesty, which was, of course, an echo the Message. Some observations were made by Mr. Joliffe, Mr. W. Smith, Mr. Sheridan, Mr. Dundas, and Mr. Hobboufe, ail of whom concurred in the necessity of a dutiful Addiels to his Majesty. Mr Sheridan earnestly enforced the necessity of unanimous endeavours to restore that subordination, without which the prosperity of the Country was gone : but he still peifilted his opinion of the culpability and incapacity of Ministers, and dreaded the extension of our penal laws. Mr. Pitt rejoiced in the appearance of unanimity would, he milled, be effeffive. It would Ihew, mat though Gentlemen Hill retained their difference of opinion other topics, they would ever co-operate when it was necessary to concentrate and point the general force against the common enemy. The Parliament was willing to do its duty, dit now remained for the people, by demonstrating their zeal, to check and disappoint our foes, both internal and external. gain the present unanimity, he would sacrifice every thing but the substance of his measure. Those Gentlemen who objected to the tendency of the Bill would rcc. Ile£f, that they were pledged not to adopt, but only to consider*’ of the measure. The question on the Address was then put, and carried nemine contradicente. Mr. Pitt then role, and moved for leave to bring in a Bill lor the better prevention and punishhment of attempts seduce from their egiance an i duty his Majesty’s Sea or Land Forces.—That attemp’s were ?s frequent as they were malignant was unfortunately a matter of general notoriety. The hand-bills, &c. which had been so profusely distributed amongst the foidiery, were a sufficient proof that the same engines were at work which had unhappily succeeded in dilbrganizihg the Navy. Thefe attempts were not solitary or casual; on the contrary, they were made the same time in distant parts of the kingdom, and in such a manner as to shew that they were made in concert, and were the result of an extensive system. A mutiny was reported to have taken place at Maidstone, and this was lived to the fuldieis at Newcaflle, for the yt’-rpofeofinducing them to follow the example.-'—At the hour, the troops at Maidstone were informed that there had been an insurrection at Newcastle. This shewed that the plan was as exrcrsive as it was malignant in its nature. The number of attestations issued by the brave and loyal foidiery was a proof that such attempts were lately multiplied. It was neceffary, therefore, to employ fome rigour, and to make the penalty of the law keep pace, if it were polGble, \vi;h the malignity of the offence. The exifting laws n t deter men from the crime and this of itfelf, was a luffieient pro ff that they were inadequate to its punilhment. The ffence was now punishable only as a misdemeanour, by fine and imprisonment. The crime of enticing men to desert was made the object of a particular Statute; but to seduce men to turn their arms against their country was furely an atrocity of a deeper dye. In point of guilt and danger, it went beyond all treason ; yet as offence could not be defined with sufficient exaiffnefs, it was not his purpose to make the offender liable to the penalties of treason. He should only propofe to make it a case of aggravated ion, and punishable by transportation, at the difcrc the Court. He trufted that this was not doing too much, and he h ped the event would (hew that he had not done too little. He concluded by moving for leave to bring in the Bill. Mr. Serjeant Adair, after remarking on the eno m’ty the crime, expressed his opinion that the crisis called for measures of extraordinary rigour, though of a temporary nature. He was at all times averfe to the severity of the Penal laws, and wished that many of. them could be from the Statute Book. The present measure he mnft confider, Itowcver, as inadequate to the occalian. The offence was, in his opinion, ill deferibed even as an a grava mifdemeanour. The offender in this cafe would nave an opportunity to poftpone his trial, when fpeedy example were moft neceffary. In his opinion, at the prefent moment, the crime fiiould be le Feiony or Death. Mr, Pitt faid, that the propofition of the learned Gentleman was undoubtedly fit matter for deliberation. If the punilhment were made more fevere, the Bill, of courfe, muft be temporary. The House had th-ir option between the two fuggeftions, and mignt decide when the 811 was .) . the Committee. Baker admitted that a ftrong remedy was ncceflary Not only fecret oaths, but oaths ot iccrecy, had been . 1 minilfered the Navy. Againft thefcfome remedy Ihou'd bfi^r ! , provided, which might prevent the renewal of practices?; , j'i The Majler of the Roils faid, that, is this was to he mifdcmeanour with fe punilhment, the differen was little more than a difference in terms. The Bill was then ought op and read firft and feet) ,<£ time, and ordered to be committed for to-morrow. The Committee on the Bill was poftponed ' ■\Vednefday next. Adjourned.

---
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000236/17970612/001/0001

Leeds Intelligencer - Monday 12 June 1797
THURSDAY'S POST. LONDON, June 6.

On Monday in the House of Commons, the bill for more effectually resraining intercourse with the crews of certain of his Majesty's ships, now in a state of mutiny and rebellion, and for the more efectual suppression thereof, was read a third time and passed.

The House of Commons have also passed bill for the better prevention and punishment of attempts to seduce persons serving in his Majesty's forces, either by sea or land, from their duty and allegiance to his Majesty, or to incite them to mutiny and disobedience, making the offenders guilty of felony, and adjudging them to suffer death, as in cases of felony, without benefit of clergy. Both these bills have been since read three times in the House of Peers, and this day received the royal assent by commission.

---

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/BL/0002155/17970617/010/0003?browse=true
Mutinous seamen

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0002155/17970617/014/0004 "rot in the wooden walls of Old England

oaths bill also related 1797?


---