# Nurseries of Vice


---
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000170/18551006/013/0003
Isle of Wight Observer - Saturday 06 October 1855

During the last week a deputation, consisting of the clergymen of St. Thomas' Church, the ministers of the different dissenting congregations and others, presented the following memorial to the magistrates at the Townhall respecting the social condition of the borough, in the hope that means may be taken to prevent a continuation the present exhibition of indecency and open prostitution which now disgrace its thoroughfares :—

"To the worshipful the Mayor and the Magistrates of the borough of Newport, Isle of Wight.

"The memorial of the undersigned inhabitants of the said borough.

"Your memorialists beg respectfully to state that for some time they have, with many respectable inhabitants, had their attention turned to the moral aspect the borough of Newport.

"A few of the more serious part of the community are laboring, by appliances of a simple, but they trust efficient character, to rectify existing evils; but they fear that, without the cooperation which the municipal authorities can afford, their effort, however well intended, and however admirably conducted, will meet with counteractions too powerful, humanly speaking, for them to surmount.

"Without wishing to cast any reflection upon the municipal authorities, your memorialists request permission to suggest, whether the leading thoroughfares of the borough might not be kept more free from interruption, occasioned by individuals collecting in groups, and frequently conducting themselves in a manner most offensive to virtue — whether the By-Law No. 25 ['Every common prostitute, or night walker, who shall loiter or in any thoroughfare or public place for the purpose of prostitution or solicitation, shall for such offence forfeit and pay the sum of ten shillings'] could not be put in force, so that by its rigorous execution obstructions to a course of immorality might lawfully created — whether a stricter supervision could not be exercised over lodginghouses, lest they become the resort of characters for whose use they were not intended, and over public houses and beershops, multiplied, your memorialists fear, far beyond the wants of the borough, and where attractions are held out to make them the rendezvous of persons whose antecedents create a suspicion that they will prove nurseries of vice.

"In imploring the magistrates to exercise their authority for the prevention of crime as far as they can, your memorialists wish to be distinctly understood that they are not seeking any class legislation; their object being the purification of the borough from the social evils which unhappily abound within it, and it is their wish to see every offender, whatever be his grade in life, made amenable for his conduct. Any partial application of the law they would deprecate, for intelligent observers of passing events must see that ail efforts to cleanse the fountains of social life are invariably unpopular and fail, unless even-handed justice be administered all transgressors.

"In conclusion, your memorialists would observe that they address you, not as the organ of any political party, or of any religious denomination, but as inhabitants of the borough, deeply concerned for its highest welfare. Upon your aid they rely as invaluable auxiliary to the various benevolent agencies which are now operating for its social and moral improvement. Their aims, they are free to confess, partake of high and sacred character. On an arm more powerful than that which is human, and on means more effective than any legislation can afford, they depend for their ultimate attainment; but as the work is great, and hindrances from various causes multiply, they desire every kind legitimate of cooperation, and that which an intelligent and a vigilent magistracy can afford they appreciate too highly not to seek, and which, from the known character of the gentlemen who sit upon the beach, they feel pursuaded they shall not seek in vain.

"And your memorialists respectfully subscribe their names hereto."

Dr. Wavell, on the part of the magistrates, replied that the bench would do everything in their power to remedy the evils complained of. 


---

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001417/18560209/015/0005
Isle of Wight Mercury - Saturday 09 February 1856

The Mayor rose, and said, that he should not be doing justice to his own feelings or to the town if he did not bring before the Council the grows insult which had been cast on them by the address, the Tempter and Tempted, written, it was said, by a gentleman lately come to reside there, the Rev. Carus Wilson, and it was with no ordinary feelings of indignation that he found the beastly tract had been taken to his house, and was in the hands of his family and female domestics; could any honest man, could any father of a family avoid feeling grieved that such gross accounts of vice should be brought to defile the minds of young persons? He was more astonished and indignant to find that copies had been delivered to the children at the Sunday schools, and the National schools. He hoped the British schools had escaped the pollution. He considered these females who distributed such a work and placed them in the hands of children a disgrace to their sex. He regretted that these meddling troublesome fellows who were interfering where they had no connection with the towu, and he should have thought that Mr. Smith might have found other ditties for which he was paid by the Treasury, rather than interfering with the town of Newport. He felt it his duty to deny most clearly, and to protest most strongly against the falsehoods and calumnies which had been circulated respecting the Borough of Newport. He asserted firmly, and would prove his assertion that there were few more moral towns than Newport and no garrison town where there was so little debauchment. He could prove by official returns which he had obtained, that the health of the soldiers their general morality, while at Parkhurst, were much above the average. He could not have allowed the Council to have separated without throwing off the foul imputation, and pressing from his heart the indignation he felt at the insult that had been put on them, and the town.—Mr. W. B. Mew concurred io the sentiments and feelings expressed by the Mayor, and denounced the exaggerated statements about the town, which haul been put forth.—Mr. Robert Pinnock congratulated the Council on the course taken by the Mayor, to revel the calumnies which had been indulged in thousands of the books, had been circulated, and unless contradicted, migbt cling to the town. He asked the Mayor whether he would take it up as the organ of the Council, & repudiate the calumnioues attack on the town. Its origin could be traced to a new movement that had been organized in the memorial addressed to the Magistrates, and to a newspaper paragraph. He considered that the sooner such proceedings were discouraged the better.—Mr. Pring said the memorial had been handed to the Watch Committee, of which he was one, and after the strictest investigation, they came to an unanimous vote, that there was no cause to interfere with tie general arrangements. He had lately been in most of the towns in the kingdom where the military were near, and he said with confidence, that Newport for order, quietness and morality, surpassed all the others. Some persons were over nice, and he thought the Town Clerk might as will stay at home, as to go about interfering with others.—Mr. Eldridge (Town Clerk), said he was one of those who agreed with the memorial; he thought it was quite right, and no censure ought to be cast on those who were parties to it. The attention of the Magistrates was called to facts which were patent to all Gentlemen, and if those present had seen the report of the Town Missionary, which Dr. Wavell and himself had presented to them weekly, they would know the amount of vice which prevailed.—The Mayor said they had no right to sit in judgment upon others, they had no authority to judge and collect accusations against their neighbours. If this was the occupation of a Town Missionary, the sooner he was removed the better.—Mr. Eldridge said he knew that he had lifted up many who had been cast down, and he could tell of those in higher places, whose conduct would not bear investigation.—Mr. Pinnock said that the missionary was engaged to raise up the frail, but the course pursued by him and his employers, had turned out a curse to the town.—Mr. Wilkins and Mr. Morgan expressed similar feelings with the other members of the Council.—Mr. W. B. Mew wished to know by what authority these men had set up this court of inquisition; he felt indignant at their presumption. There was a newspaper once circulated in the town, called Paul Pry, which was very objectionable, and caused unpleasantness in many families but this was much worse, as the scandal was handed from one to the other, without the knowledge of the person whose reputation was attacked. If this Paul Pry defended by Mr. Eldridge, went into these abodes of sin and temptation, he ought to be exceedingly good; as pitch could not be handled without defilement. The exposure that day should induce the Town Clerk to cut such acquaintance, and he could not help feeling disgusted that men should be found, who could listen to the reports, full of scandals and libels on their neighbours.—The Mayor said he was afraid there was a great deal too much of spying and prying going on. After a long conversation, it was determined that it should be left to the Mayor either to write in his own name to the Rev. Carus Wilson or in that of the Council contradicting his statements, as embodied in the address "Tempters and Tempted." Since the meeting of the Town Council and the exposure of the system of espionage which has been carried on in Newport, principally by the means of the town missionary, Mr. Tucker, several subscribers have determined to have their names struck as they never contemplated that they were paying their money to gratify the curiosity of individuals, or to rake up scandal against their neighbours.

---
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001417/18560301/027/0005
Isle of Wight Mercury - Saturday 01 March 1856

James Lewis, alias Nobby Ducks, who had been taken into custody on Saturday evening, for selling the letter of the Rev. W. Carus Wilson, in answer to one sent him by the Mayor of Newport, respecting the tract "the Tempters and Tempted," appeared in court. The defendant had been liberated on his own bail, and retained Mr. George Prince Joyce as his legal adviser. It was told on his appearing in the box that there war charge against then put several questions to the Bench, but was answered that his client was discharged. He applied for an order for the restitution of the pamphlets, and was referred to the inspector of Police. COUNTY POLICE Luca. Caar..—An extraordinary meeting of the County Magistrates was held on Monday, at the finildhall, to hear the charge made by Mr. Francis Pittis, of Newport, against the Rey. W. Carus Wilson, for having written a false and scandalous libel on his character. The court-room and gallery were crowded with persons of interest of the Town, and other parts of the Island. Th. Bench consisted of the Hon. a'Court Holmes (chairman), Sir John Simeon, Bart., Capt. Kerr, Capt. Brigstocke, Cooke. and J..k. Hambrough, Esqr,. Mr. Eldridge appeared tier the prosecutor, and Mr. Ford for the defendant. The latter handed in a Medical Certificate that the health of the defendant would not allow of his appearing that day. The case proceeded without his presence. Mr. Eldridge observed that it had been said a good name was a man's best inheritance, it certainly was above all earthly treasure. He was humid to say, his client had the respect of all who knew him, and he must say that the high and honourable position which Mr. Pittis holds, as Alderman of the Borough, makes him careful of not allowing even shadows to be cast on his reputation. ii a certain tract, imputations are thrown on his character, and although he feels free front all a , persions, he could not allow them to pass, whether intended or not, without a public denial of their application. He believed they were not intended, but that the deterulant, with 'cleat zeal, had exceeded his duty ; for when man steps out of his way, on the delicate ground of private character, he must treat the subject in a delicate manner, and not lush hastily to commit wrong; because he might think there was some good in the distance. No one who reads the tract and pamphlet, can doubt that they reflect seriously on the character of the town, and on individuals; it is not simply a degree of bitterness, but there are the most unwarranted innott does. lie dint not stand as an apologist for vice; but it was a most unfortunate circumstance, that when a memorial had been pre.seitted to the magistrates which they admitted would check crime and immorality, that these works should have been brought out. He admitted there was much evil, and when he had the honour of filling the Lace of first magistrate, he, like those in office now, could only deal with eases brought before him. There were cases of gross immoral houses always complained of, by patties, who would never come forward to prove the cases within their own observation. Plain allusions had been made in the pamphlet to the Town Clerk,—he would say, that his °lnset in the council were misunderstood and misreported. He was sensible of the evils in the Town, n.ad with others had endeavoured to diminish the amount. A certain journal came before hint. but only 'hewing tine operations of the society. It did not refer to any member in the council, or to any one in authority; it was merely a record of the poor parsons who had been visited. An apology of an ample character having been given completely satisfactory, Mr. Pittis telt he had done his duty to himself, and wished to show he had no vindictive motives. A letter was then brought forward and read. Mr. Ford said he represented Mr. Wilson, and he regretted that of the observations made by Mr. Eldridge, would compel him to say more than he had intended, which was simply to offer the fullest apology and explanation to Mr. Pittis. Mr. Eldridge had shown that Mr. Wilson was fully justified in the course he had taken, by the admissions made by himself: on the part of Mr. Wilson he was instructed to say, that that gentlemen had the fullest confidence in the integrity and strict morality of Mr. Pittis, and that the quotation from the letter of a friend at Bristol, although one or two circumstances appeared to correspond, had no reference to him. and lie begged again to say that there was no imputation intended to be conveyed, and lead the letter purporting to be one from Bristol.—Mr. Ford said that if there should be a republication, the paasage affecting Mr. Pittis should be taken out.—Mr. Hearn attempted to express his dissent from the course adopted, but was stopped by Mr. Ford, who said that he and the bench had only to do with Mr. Pittis, it was quite irregular.—The chairman after a consultation, said, that as the case had been compromised, they were of opinion that Mr. II earn should not be heard. Others were affected besides Mr. Pittis.—Mr. Hearn said that others were implicated in the charges, and the apology was made to them, he would not be precluded from taking proceedings in another place.— Mr. Eldridge observed that Nlr. Pittis felt that after this ample apology, he should not be acting as a man or a Christian to press the case.—The chairman said that the course pursued was very creditable to both parties. Mr. Pittis very properly came forward to vindicate his character from the vile suspicion. With regard to the paniphl •t, every one must see that it was intended for Mr. Pittis, Lai no one would believe it of him. lie hoped Mr. Wilson's friends would advise him better than to re-issue the tracts. He could not perhaps control his zeal, but he hoped he would not use it in such an uncalled for way. He was sort). that Mr. l'ittis should hate had occasion to appear that day. Mr. Wilson said the quotation did not apply to Mr. Pittis, and they were bound to In lieve ST. TIIOWAs'S CHURCH, NEW TORT.—Wc haVe naiCh pleasure in calling the attention of our readers to an advertisement in our columns of a grand Bazaar to be held. in August next, under the patronage of ti, Queen, at Carisbrookc Castle, for the purpose of augme Milo, • lie Building Float of the new Church of St. Thomas at Newport. We are convinced our lady readers will gladly seize this opportunity of encouraging art in connection with religion, by donations to the Bazaar of those curious and highly interest. g speeimens of ingenuity in needlework, crotchet. chenille, &e., &e., &c., which only ladies can fabricate. At the saute time. it will be in the power of the husband, the tither, the son the brother, to devote his sympathy by eontributions of boaks. paintings, or "hard carli."—Now this is not a local matter : it appeals to the sympathies of all who love high art. Indeed, every islander is interested in the decoration of the capital of the Island by so noble a specimen of reclean'sfleet architecture. —by a structure so vividly exemplifying the pure and refined principles of a cultivated taste as the new Church of St. Thomas. Let it not be said that the Inhabitants of the Isle of Wight are insensible to the beauty sat art, when devoted to its grandeat purpose—the illustration sat rcag.on. 



