

Riboleau House history V3

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000231/18750814/021/0007
Hampshire Chronicle - Saturday 14 August 1875

Litigation.—The war between Mr. Henry Knight and Mr. Barrow (the Mayor of Ryde) has, it appears, commenced. The latter has been served with a writ calling upon him within a certain period to make an affidavit in reference to the ejection of Mr. Knight from the public meeting at Ryde on the French Inundation Relief question. It is rumoured that Mr. Knight intends suing the Mayor for a large sum, and the case will probably be tried at Winchester.


https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/search/results/1850-01-01/1899-12-31?basicsearch=%22alderman%20b.%20barrow%22&exactsearch=false&retrievecountrycounts=false&sortorder=dayearly

"Alderman B. Barrow"

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0002941/18751009/130/0008
Hampshire Independent - Saturday 09 October 1875

BOROUGH POLICE COURT.

On Monday, before Admiral Katon and H. D.. Browne, Esq.—John Oliver Matcham, formerly butler in the employ the Mayor of Ryde (Alderman B. Barrow, J.P.). was brought up in custody charged with being in the house of the Mayor, "Southfield," for an unlawful purpose on the previous evening.—Edward Kean, butler now in the service of the Mayor, deposed that he was in the house between six and eight on the previous evening, and that he did not admit prisoner, or anyone, during that time. If anyone came in, it was without his knowledge. Mr. Barrow deposed that about five minutes past seven he went to his dressing room for a short time, left, but shortly returned to fetch a coat. When he went the second time to the room, which was on the ground floor, he found an obstruction from within. The obstruction was continued till he gave a violent push, forcing the door open. On entering, he found prisoner behind the door. He had warned him a week or two previously never to enter his house on any pretence whatever. He took hold of him and turned him out in the street. There were a lot of valuables in the room. but he did not miss any. Prisoner knew as well as he did where they were. When he asked him what he was doing there, he said he had come to speak to him about a character, and he (the Mayor) need not say he was not in the habit of receiving people in his dressing room.—Superintendent B??? deposed to apprehending prisoner at his lodgings, the Collonade. He said he went to Southlands to see Mr. Barrow about a character : he pulled the bell, but could not say whether it rang or not: as no one came, he opened the door, and went in the hall, and had not been there long before he herd Mr. Barrow coming, on which he went into his drawing room. He didn't mean to steal anything. When Mr. Barrow came he kept the door to. Mr. Barrow took him by the collar, and pit hint out in the street.- Sentenced to a week's imprisonment, with hard labour.

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001365/18751009/012/0002
Portsmouth Times and Naval Gazette - Saturday 09 October 1875

CONCEALMENT FOR UNLAWFUL PURPOSES.—On Wednesday, before Admiral Katon and H. D. Brown, Esq., borough magistrates, a man named Oliver Matcham, late butler in the employ of B. Barrow, Esq., Mayor of Ryde, was charged with concealing himself in the Mayor's house for unlawful purposes.— The Mayor deposed that between seven and eight on Tuesday evening he was going into his dressing-room, but found that he could scarcely open the door. He managed. however, to force it open, and then found the prisoner crouching behind the door. The defendant's apology was that he had gone to the house for a character, and had run into the Mayor's dressing-room on hearing his approach, as he was frightened. He assured the bench he had no dishonest intention, He was sent to prison for seven days, with hard labour.

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000183/18471225/018/0002
London Evening Standard - Saturday 25 December 1847

Services of the late Vice Admiral Riboleau. — Vice Admiral Peter Ribolean, whose death we announced last week, entered the Royal Navy in October, 1780,and served thirteen years successively in the Prince William, Triumph, Grafton, Cambridge, Assistance, Goliah, Acta*on, Goliah again, Alcide, Duke, and Victory, before he obtained the rank ot lieutenant, in August, 1793. Alost of this time was spent In the West Indies, coast of America, Channel, and off Tou- lon. In the Prince William lie was in Sir Saninel Hood's action off Martinique, April 22, 1781. He served in Lord Howe's fleet during the Spanish armament; proceeded in the Victory with Lord Hood to the Mediterranean; and pre- vious to the evacuation of Toulon was taken prisoner by the republican fleet in the outer anchorage, whilst under a Hag of truce he was conveying a letter from the commander in chief to Lieut. Edward Cooke, then negociating with the committee general. He, however, after suffering much indignity and ill-treatment, regain d his liberty amid the confusion that arose among the French sailors. As a lieutenant he served from 1794 to January, 1716, when he was promoted, in L'Arethuse, Glory, Barfleur, and Monarch, off Toulon, in the Channel fleet, at the Cape and in India. He was aide de camp to Captain G. Keith Elphinstone (afterwards Lord Keith), Governor of Fort la Malgue, kc., and was present with him during the siege of Toulon, when he brought L'Arethuse, with a Jacobin crew, to England. He was in the Glory, 98, commanded by Capt. John Elphinstone, under Lord Ho we, in the battle of the Ist of June, 1794; in the Monarch, 74, with Sir George Keith Elphinstone, at the taking of the Cape of Good Hope, and commanded a party of seamen from the tlsg-ship on shore for fifteen weeks during the operations, lie was first lieutenant of the Monarch, when she proceeded to Madras; and on being promoted to commander of the Hobart, was sent home with dispatches announcing the surrender of Ceylon. As commander, he was appointed to the Astrea in 1800, was employed in conveying the Guards to Vigo, and was then attached to the Egyptian expedition. He was selected by Lord Keith as the senior commander to be attached to the army with seamen and guns; commanded the gun-boats on Lake Marotis, at the back of Alexandria, when navigable; and on Sir Sidney Smith's rejoining his ship, commanded the naval detachments on shore, until ill-health obliged him to embark. He was promoted for his services in Egypt in April, 1802, the gallant Sir Sidney Smith having recommended him in official letters to Lord Keith relative to the memorable battles of the Bt.li, l.th, and 21st March, 1801, when Abercromby received his mortal wound. Sir Sidney says, writing to Lord Keith: — " You must, as well as myself, have admired the bravery, activity, and perseverance of Captains Riboleau, Guion, Saville, Brown, and Hillyar, together with that of the seamen and officers under their orders, by whose unparalleled exertions the guns were disembarked, at the same moment, and moved forward with them in action. Captain Riboleau, the senior commander, exerted himself in the most praiseworthy manner along the whole line on shore." On the 22d he writes:— "Captain Riboleau and the other commanding officers and seamen attached to the field pieces on the line behaved with their usual energy and bravery, and merit your lordship's approbation." For his services on the above occasions he received a medal from the Grand Seigneur. As a captain he served five years in command of the Sea Fencibles in Norfolk, Kent, 'and Devonshire. He remained subsequently for a long time on half-pay, notwithstanding his repeated applications for a ship, and such was his anxiety te serve, that in the year 1811, he proceeded as a volunteer in the Colossus, in Lord Keith's fleet off Brest. In February, 1822, Lord Colville applied for Captain Riboleau as his flag captain, and as such he served on board the Semiramis frigate for three years, under the gallant rear admiral, then commander in chief at Cork. Not having served Uie number of years afloat as captain, as required by the order in council of 1827, on succeeding to his flag, he was placed on the retired list, much to the gallant admiral's disappointment. He died in the 79th year of his age.
