# The Sandown Barracks Master Affair, 1806




https://api.parliament.uk/historic-hansard/commons/1806/may/21/barrack-abuses
HANSARD 21 May 1806, Commons Sitting
BARRACK ABUSES.
HC Deb 21 May 1806 vol 7 cc293-5

Lord H. Petty rose, and observed, that before he proceeded to the statement of the business, of which he had given notice, he trusted the house would indulge him with their attention for a few moments, while he said something respecting what had lately passed in the house concerning the barrack department. It would be in the recollection of the house that, when the hon, gent. behind him (Mr. Robson) brought forward some motions on that subject, one of them had been agreed to, while the previous question had been moved and carried with respect to the others. This, the house would recollect, had been done in the absence of all explanation, as to the object which the hon. gent. had in view, that was intelligible to him, or he believed, that could be intelligible to any person in the house. He had moved the previous question, with a view to induce the hon. gent. to come forward with the necessary information, and also with the intention, in case he should still refuse, to examine into the business himself, and find it out either with or without his assistance. He now flattered himself, that he had discovered the object of these motions. He found that they related to transactions, which took place in 1805, respecting the barns, hired as barracks, in the division of Sandown Bay, in the Isle of Wight, which were paid for at a very extravagant rate, when a building for barracks was offered at a much more reasonable expence. He would, therefore, under these circumstances, propose all the motions of the hon. gent., respecting which, the previous question had been before carried, and also add a new motion, which would relate to the barrack-master, who, it appeared, had hired these barns at an extravagant rent, and made an improper report, with regard to the building offered as a barrack. It was right that he should be called upon to explain his conduct, with respect to this 294transaction. He concluded, by moving for Copies of the letters from Mr. Day, of Brading, in the Isle of Wight, to the barrack-master of the Sandown Bay division, and to the secretary at war, respecting the building of a barrack at Brading, with the answers to them, if any; and a list of the barns, hired as barracks. In addition to these which had been previously called for, he moved for, a Copy of the report that had been made by major Davis, the barrack-master, relative to the proposals of Mr. Day, for building a barrack at Brading.
Mr. Robson rose to second the motion, and at the same time to express some astonishment at the conduct of the noble lord throughout the whole of this business. Feeling it to be his privilege and right, as a member of parliament, to call for certain documents, respecting the extravagant expenditure of public money, he had given 4 days notice of his intention to move for those documents, that there might be no intention imputed to him of wishing to take the house by surprise. He accordingly made his motion, which he prefaced by such observations as he thought could leave no doubt upon the mind of any gent. who heard him, as to the object of his motion, and the intention with which he meant to follow it up. The noble lord thought proper to resist his motion, and to vote for the previous question; but now, when the extravagance of the barrack department, and the extraordinary opposition of the noble lord to his motion for papers to prove that extravagance, were in the mouth of every man who walked the public streets, the noble lord himself moved for a list of those very documents, which he verily believed was a copy of the identical motions which had been refused upon a former night. Really he thought it but reasonable to expect, that the noble lord's motion this day would have been accompanied by some apology for a conduct so unaccountable.

Lord Henry Petty answered, that for the house he should certainly offer no apology for refusing, on such grounds as it thought fit, to comply with the motion alluded to; and for himself he thought it sufficient to state, that he was not, on the former night, made acquainted with the hon. gent.'s object, so as to justify him in assenting to his motion. He now was acquainted with the purposes of his motion, and therefore moved to produce the papers in question.

Mr. Robson rose to explain, but was proceeding to a length which occasioned a general cry of chair! chair! upon which, the speaker reminded the hon. member of the order of the house, and he sat down.—The motions were then agreed to.

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000230/18060526/008/0003
Hampshire Chronicle - Monday 26 May 1806

HOUSE OF COMMONS

*Wednesday, May 21.*

...

BARRACK PAPERS.

*Lord Henry Petty* observed, that before he proceeded to the statement of the business of which he had given notice, he trusted the House would indulge him with their attention for a few moments, while he said something respecting what had lately passed in the House concerning the Barrack Department. It would be in the recollection of the House that when the Hon. Gentleman behind (Mr. Robson) brought forward some motions on that subject, of them had been agreed to, while the previous question had been moved and carried with respect to the others. This had been done in the absence of all explanation, as to the object which the Hon. Gentleman had in view, that was intelligible to him, or, he believed, that could be intelligible to any person in the House. He had moved the previous question with a view to induce the Hon. Gentleman to come forward with the necessary information, and also with the intention, in case he should still refuse, to examine into the business himself, and find it out with or without his assistance. He now flattered himself that he had discovered the object of these motions. He found that they related to transactions which took place in 1805, respecting the barns hired as barracks in the division of Sandown Bay, in the Isle of Wight, which were paid for at a very extravagant rate, when a building for Barracks was offered at a much more reasonable expence. He would, therefore, under these circumstances, move all the motions of the Hon. Gentleman, respecting which the previous question had been before carried, and also add a new motion, which would relate to the Barrack Master, who, it appeared, had hired these barns at an extravagant rent, and made an improper report with regard to the building offered as a Barrack. It was right that he should be called upon to explain his conduct with respect to this transaction. He concluded by moving for Copies of the Letters from Mr. Day, of Brading in the Isle of Wight, to the Barrack Master of the Sandown Bay Division, and to the Secretary at War, respecting the building of a Barrack at Brading, with the answers to them, if any; and a list of the Barns hired as Barracks. In addition to these which had been previously called for, he moved for a Copy of the Report that had been made by Major Davies, the Barrack Master, relative to the proposals of Mr. Day for building a Barrack at Brading. 

The motions of Lord H. Petty were carried.


https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000230/18060609/004/0002
Hampshire Chronicle - Monday 09 June 1806

HOUSE OF COMMONS.

*Monday, June 2.*

*Mr. Vansittart* moved for a Paper relative to the Barracks of the Sandown Division, in the Isle of Wight, which had been omitted before. It was a letter from Major Davies, the Assistant Barrack Master General, of the 31st of January, 1806, with the affidavit of Wm. Ward, transmitted along with it.

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000069/18060707/009/0004
Hampshire Telegraph - Monday 07 July 1806

HOUSE OF COMMONS

... The *Secretary at War* moved for several papers relating to the erection of barracks at Sandown Bays, in the Isle of Wight, and for a copy of the letter, dated, in February last, dismissing Major Davis from the Office of Barrack Master, in the Isle of Wight. These Papers were soon thereafter presented, and ordered to be printed; as were also certain papers on the same subject, moved for by *Mr. Robson*. ...

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000230/18060707/005/0002
Hampshire Chronicle - Monday 07 July 1806

HOUSE OF COMMONS

*Tuesday, July 1.*

...

*The Secretary at War* moved, "that there be laid before the House copies of several Letters and Correspondence between the Barrack Master General and Major Davies, of Highbury Barracks, the Isle Wight, respecting the hiring of barns, and other out-houses, for the purposes of barracks; respecting the misconduct of the Barrack Master of Sandown and the Letter from the Secretary at War, of the February, for the dismissal of the said Barrack Master;" which were agreed to, and afterwards presented, and ordered to lie on the table, and to be printed.

*Mr. Robson* moved for a copy of the Letter of James Pritchard, Barrack Master Sandown, in the Isle of Wight dated the 20th of January, 1806, relative the glaring peculation in the Barrack Department.

*The Secretary at War* wished to have the last words omitted, as it would imply admission of peculations which had not been proved; which suggestion, well as the motion, was agreed to.



https://archive.org/details/sim_cobbetts-weekly-political-register_1806-08-16_10_7/page/2/mode/1up?q=%22barrack+master%22+sandown
Cobbett's Weekly Political Register  1806-08-16: Vol 10 Iss 7

col.235-9

BARRACK ABUSES.

The Letter of which the following is a copy, accompanied the Affidavits, transmitted to the Secretary at War, by Mr. Atkins, which affidavits will be found in the foregoing Number, at page 206.—The Letter, like the affidavits, was laid_ before parliament, and afterwards printed, upon the motion of Mr. Robson.

*Copy of a Letter from Barrack Master Atkins late of Sandown Barracks, to the Secretary at War; dated 29th June, 1806. — Dated, No. 2, Margaret-street, Cavendish Square, June 29, 1806.*

Sir,—Haviing obtained the printed papers called for by the House of Commons, I hasten to vindicate myself from the charges laid against me, and, by one connected chain of circumstances, to prove the malignity of Major Davis. It was always the liberal practice of the Barrack-Master-General, to forward to the person against whom an accusation was made, the charges themselves, in order to enabie him to make his defence, and I believe that my case is the only one in which this practice has been depaparted from. I shrink not from candour; from two farmers I have borrowed money, 10l. from Mr. White, and 20l. from Mr. Smith, who issued a warrant against me on my note, when Major Davis came to the Island; if this declaration, and these acts, be sufficient to break me, I shall be patient under, my dismissal, as I wish not to hold my place at the expense of honour and truth. I owed my appointment to Sandown to the right hon. the then Secretary at War, Mr.Bragge, who, on my own application, granted me the appointment in a manner which did the highest honour to his liberality, observing, that he felt himself happy to be at liberty to appoint me to the situation, from the favourable testimonies he had received of my conduct from the officers under whom I had served. To the right hon. Mr. Windham, his predecessor in office, I owed my former appointment of Assistant Barrack-Master of Out-Posts, who with equal liberality and feeling, in the midst of his important duties, listened attentively like Mr. Bragge, to the application of a private individual, and granted his request. To these two gentlemen, rendered as respectable by their private worth as by the situations they have filled, to the public at large, and to my own family and friends, I feel that I owe the justification of my character; and, under this conviction, Sir, I humbly beg that this letter, with the enclosed affidavits, may be favoured with the same publicity as has attended the charge laid against me, in order that. those who have heard the accusation may likewise hear my defence, and, with unbiassed judgment, draw their inference. You will permit me, Sir, here to comment on the conduct of Major Davis, as testified in the enclosed affidavits. It will be seen that the report made by him to the Barrack-Master-General of my frequent habits of drinking, and consequent inattention to the troops, was contradicted by the certificates of the commanding officers of the troops, who had occupied the barracks and posts for some months. This charge was wholly unprovoked by me, farther than by a discontinuance of every other attention to him from the period of his conversation at my table, except that obedience and deference due to a superior in office on all official communication; yet even then, unjustly as I had been accused, I held the sacred rights of hospitality too much in respect to violate them by a disclosure of his conversation, and at this moment, I should shrink from the thought of injuring him, were not the promulgation of his conduct necessary to my own justification. What an enemy then was Major Davis likely to become, when I stated to the right hon. the Secretary at War, the barns taken at enormous rents. Major Davis was the person who had taken those barns; Major Davis was the person sent down to act on the proposal of Mr. Day; was it the interest of Major Davis to make that proposal appear advantageous to government, after the agreements which he himself had made? I forbore to implicate him; in my letter appears no individual resentment, but a proposal for the public good; I might then, if actuated by rancour, have stated, that a mud hut, built by the owner for *eighteen pounds*, as I understand from a man employed in the erection, was rented annually at *one hundred and thirty pounds*, and the interior fitted up at the expense of government, and taken and agreed for by Major Davis. There was also transmitted by me to the Barrack-Master-General, and by the Barrack-Master-General transmitted to Major Davis, a plan and proposal of a house at Brading, to the construction of twelve officers, at sixty pounds per annum. On referring to the rents paid for officers lodgings and accommodations in 1804-5, it will be found, that seven pounds fifteen shillings was paid weekly for accommodations for ten officers; the house therefore offered by Mr. Kemp, in the above proposal to which I allude, and which he agreed to have ready in three months at 1l. 3s. 1d. per week, at the rate of 60l, yearly, makes a saving of 6l. 11s. 11d. per week, and two officers more accommodated.—Against the Affidavit of Ward, I enclose my own, together with those of my sisters. As to my catering for a Major, by supplicating Ward for a lamb, it is too low and egregiously contemptible for me to stoop to answer. I have received presents from him of poultry, and two pigs, and in return for those, and other civilities sworn to in my affidavit as having been received from him, made him a present of a horse, which I have no doubt he has still in his possession; and from other farmers I have also received presents of the same nature, and know that other Barrack-Masters have done the same. The tampering of one of my own department with Farmer Ward, is proved by my sister's affidavit and my own; early in November last, my sister and I accused Mr. Page of it to his face, telling him of Farmer Ward's declaration, which he no otherwise denied, than merely by saying, we were too hasty. To the receipts and accounts laying in the Barrack Office, I refer whether there ever appeared on the books of Sandown, any account of carting done either by Farmer Kent or Harvey, who, Ward says in his oath, I told him had given me their carting money. Farmer Ward farther adds, justly too, that I paid him his rent first, and his bill for carting after. The reason of this will be found in the inclosed official letter dated the first of January, from the Barrack Office; this was the delay which my adversaries had hoped was a strong presumption of my guilt, as it obliged me to separate the payments of the rent and cartage. I appeal to every unbiassed mind, whether a person intent on illegally demanding money from a man against his fixed determination not to part with it, would have chosen the very house of that man in which to make the demand; particularly, when he had the power of summoning him to his own. On the 3d of Jan, Farmer Ward, says, I forced him to give this money. Now, my letter to the Secretary at War was dated the 20th of December, only six days previous to this, and it will be seen that in the inclosure accompanying that letter, the barn at Bigbury, belonging to Ward, was one of those I pointed out to be given up, in consequence of Mr. Day's proposal; could I therefore consider myself safe in forcing money from a man, who must shortly have come to the knowledge of my being the instrument of his losing 218l, per annum, and be weak enough to suppose, that smarting under this loss, he would not promulgate this act of extortion? Farmer Ward artfully urges, that I pleaded my distresses from imprisonment, I am not ashamed to avow my involvements, which were consequences arising from having a family to support for four-years, on five shillings a day, my pay as Assistant Barrack-Master,of Out-Posts. In my letter to the Secretary I intimated, that I could point out other matters for consideration. I alluded to savings that could not fall within the calculation of a superior in office, but of one acting within the immediate sphere of Barrack-Master. The practicability of it I can prove to a demonstration, and it would be productive of some thousands a year, without taking from the comforts of any individual. There are two other matters which I could likewise suggest, the advantages of which I am persuaded would be acknowledged by office when pointed out. There are two Barrack-Masters now in the department against whom I could bring the most serious charges; yet,notwithstanding their enmity, which was partly combined with my dismissal, I feel reluctant to do so, feeling too acutely, as the head of a family, for the poverty into which my children are now plunged, even to wish to return it on the offspring of my enemies.— With every respect I submit the whole of my case to your consideration, and have the honour, &c. (Signed) Becher Westropp Atkins, late Barrack-Master, Sandown, Isle of Wight.


https://archive.org/details/sim_cobbetts-weekly-political-register_1806-06-21_9_25/mode/1up?q=%22barrack+master%22+sandown
Cobbett's Weekly Political Register  1806-06-21: Vol 9 Iss 25

col. 898-912

Barrack-Office Abuses. It will be fresh in the recollection of the reader, that, on the 16th of May, Mr Robson moved, in the House of Commons, for certain papers, relative to Barns, rented by government, and used as Barracks, in Sandown Bay Division in the Isle of Wight. By a reference to the history of that proceeding (in p. 773 of the present Volume), it will be seen, that this motion was set aside by a motion for the previous question, made by a clerk in the Ordnance Office, named Calcraft, and commonly called, for what reason I know not, *Colonel* Calcraft; that, in a few days afterwards, Lord Henry Petty, who had supported Mr. Calcraft's motion, came to the House himself, and moved for all the papers which Mr. Robson had moved for; and that he did, indeed, adopt the very motions and the very words of Mr. Robson, though, upon the former day, he had affected to ridicule the manner of them, and had represented the matter of them as extremely improper.— The motions will be found in the account of the debate, in the page above referred to and in the following ones. The papers have been produced, together with another paper, which, for reasons by-and-by to be mentioned, Lord Henry Petty himself moved for. Of these papers I am now about to give the reader an account. Some of them I shall insert entire; and I venture to presume, that, as giving the public an insight into the shameful waste of the public money in this department, they will be regarded as of the greatest importance.—The reader will please to bear in mind, that the object of Mr. Robson's motion was to prove to the parliament, that the barns, which had been, and which now are, rented by government and used as Barracks, in the Isle of Wight, had been paid for at double the price that they ought to have been paid for; and, indeed, that the price was four times as great as it ought to have been. He confined himself to Sandown Bay Division, because to that Division more particularly his information related.—The materials for producing a conviction of the great truth he had in view were suggested to him by the following facts that had come to his knowledge; to wit, that, in the month of December last, the then Barrack Master of the Sandown Bay Division, whose name is ATKINS, wrote a letter to Mr. Dundas the then Secretary at War, stating to him that a price beyond all measure too high was given for the Barrack-Barns in his division; that, as a proof of the correctness of this his statement, he enclosed to the Secretary, proposals from Mr. James Day of Brading, for the building of a barrack, capable of lodging as many men as could be lodged in the five barns at Brading; and that the said proposed barrack would be let to government for £220 a year, whereas the said five barns (the mere *shells* of them) cost the government more than £1,100 a year. That the Secretary at War, who had been told by Mr. Atkins, that this exposure would subject him to persecution if made known, did, nevertheless, send the letter of Mr. Atkins to the Barrack-Mastery General; that thereupqn the Barrack-Master General sent the Assistant Barrack-Master General of the South Western District, one Davies, to make inquiry into the matter; that this Davies (who was the very person that had *made the contract for the barns*) arrived in the Isle of Wight on or about the 8th. of January last; that Davies called before him, and had long conferences with, Mr. Day; that Day's. proposals were not agreed to; but, that, in a very short time afterwards, to wit, in the month of March, the rent of the barns in Sandown Bay division was *reduced in or about the proportion of* ONE HALF; and, finally, which I beseech the reader well to note, that, in a few weeks after having produced this great good, in a few weeks after having rendered this essential service to the public, Mr. Atkins was, by General Fitzpatrick, TURNED OUT OF HIS EMPLOYMENT, aad let, with a large family dependent entirely upon him, to meet all the calamities of poverty accompanied with as much disgrace as it was in the power of the government to throw upon him! Upon this information, communicated by Mr. Atkins to Mr. Robson, because he knew him to be an honest and an independent man, because it was his

bounden duty to endeavour to correct such an abuse in the public expenditure, because he was convinced that the House Of Commons was the only place wherein for the matter to be brought forward With effect; upon this information it was that Mr. Robson proceeded, in the manner which the public has witnessed with so much satisfaction, and so much just praise, as well with respect to the form as the substance of the proceeding.— The reader, thus put in possession of the origin and object of Mr. Robson's motions, will be better able to accompany me in my progress through the sequel, to the first stage of which we are brought by the copy of Mr. Atkins' letter to Mr. Dundas, which was as follows: "Not being *honoured with an audience* on Monday or Tuesday when I presumed personally to solicit it, the duties of my situation forbidding longer delay, I commit to paper what I could have wished in person to communicate. Enclosed I, have the honour to transmit a letter from the late highly respected Secretary at War, a credential by which, Sir, you can appreciate the credibility you can attach to my statement.—Within the district of Sandown, where I act as Barrack Master, there are twenty barns, annually rented as, temporary barracks, fitted up in the interior at a vast expense by government, and subject to rents which must be considered enormous when simply viewed as barns. The troops have even occupied them reluctantly, and have considered government rather negligent of their comfort in appointing them to such situations.— I am far from implicating any gentleman who acted on the arrangements, but shall remonstrate to you, Sir; there was vast oversight from the proposals I have the honour fo enclose  you. The annual saving, Sir, of *nine hundred pounds and four shillings*, out of *eleven hundred and twenty pounds*, must strike you as considerable; extended through a large scale, which I can point out as practicable, the aggregate sum would be vast; this saving only including five barns out of twenty in my division. I once presumed, Sir, to *solicit a removal*, when there was a vacancy at Deal, deeming it a *necessary step for my safety, previous to disclosure. In full reliance of your honour* for immediate removal, I enforce *the danger I should incur by my residence here*, both from *those of my own department* in the island, and *the inhabitants, whose places were rented to so much advantage*. There are other matters which I could humbly point out for consideration, though the wise regulations of the present Barrack-Master General leaves but little to act on. The site on which the enclosed building would be erected is on a rising ground, the proprietor engaging to have it ready for troops in six weeks, if approved of."— This letter, which was dated on the 29th of December, was sent, at once to Mr. Atkins's superiors, as before mentioned;  and Mr. Atkins was not removed to Deal, notwithstanding the representation of his dangers! And, as this representation was made in private; as the writer could not have the least notion of its ever being made public; as he really must have apprehended the dangers of which he speaks, I leave the reader to draw his own conclusion as to the known disposition of Mr. Atkins's superiors.—The person selected to inquire into the matters mentioned in this letter was, as was before observed, Davies, the very person who had made the contract for the barns: On the 10th of January he makes, upon Day's proposals, the following report: "The building proposed by Mr. Day is not according to the plan transmitted to the right hon. the Secretary at War; Mr. Day proposes simply to erect sheds of brick-nogging, eight feet high to the plate, with a fifteen-foot span, capable in the whole range of containing 384 men, for which shell he now asks a rent of £300 per annum.— In this point of view the offer cannot be beneficial to the public, since, if it were adopted, it would require the immediate expense of £23500 to fit it up in the most slight and temporary manner, Mr. Day declining to do any thing to the building than merely delivering it over (as before observed) "*a shell*."—The Barrack Department would then have to provide for this (comparative) trivial ac‘accommodation, chimnies, floors, births, arm racks, pin rails, grates, windows, cooking kitchens, boilers, mess rooms, cleaning sheds, privies, guard house, pump and well. This, Without including hospital, officers' barracks, ‘stores, coa yard, or inclosures. "Added to which, from the situation being a field, adjoining the village of Brading, of a clay soil, the access would soon be difficult; and roads necessary. —Roads, and forming a parade, will be very expensive. Experience in works of this nature at the  Isle of Wight gives me full information, that materials for a parade is here more than commonly high."—Upon this report, which gives us a pretty good specimen of the knowledge and talents of the reporter, we must observe, that "a shell" was all that was wanted to supply the place of the barrack-barns, *they* being merely shells, and that, too, of *boards* instead of brick; that all the *additions* here mentioned had been supplied by government in the case of the barns; and tht all these additions might have been easily transferred from the barns to the proposed barrack, the shell of which would have wanted *no repairs*, whereas the shells of the barns cost *several hundreds a year to keep them in repair*. What means were employed to induce Mr. Day to *rise* in his demand from £220 to £300 a year, it would, perhaps, be difficult to say; but, after all, £300 a year would certainly have been a better bargain for the public than £1,100 a year; and how comes it, that *Davies* should have been the man selected by the Barrack Master General (Hewett) to make the inquiry and to negotiate with Mr. Day?—But, though Mr. Day's proposal was not agreed to, the *rent of the barns was reduced* in consequence of the representation, of Mr. Atkins, as appears from the papers called for by Mr. Robson, and of which papers, as. relating, to this point, the following is the substance. Here we have first a description of the buildings (for in the papers other buildings are included) rented by government, and used as barracks in Sandown Bay Division; next we have the owners names; next the time when first rented; next the weekly rent paid PREVIOUS to Mr. Atkins's representation; and, lastly, the rent NOW paid.

TO DO table

Thus; then, we see, that the buildings which cost the public 40l. 16s. 6d. a week before Mr. Atkins made his representation to the Secretary at War, now cost the public 24l. 16s. a week; which, in this trifling Division alone makes a saving of 833l. 6s. a year; and, observe, that this saving ought to have been made for *two years and a quarter* before it began to take place, and that, therefore, 1,874l. 16s. has, in this little spot, and in this article alone, been squandered away! What, then, must have been the amount of the waste upon the whole of the millions that have been paid by the public on account of barracks! And is it any wonder that the resources of the nation fall short of the expenditure? Is it any wonder, that tax upon tax is laid upon the people; and that still the demand increases daily?—But, we must not stop here. We must not suppose, that the rents are not *now* too high; for, wh. is there amongst us that does not know what a barn is? Who does not know what the *mere shell* of a barn (to be *kept in repair by government*) cannot be worth *a hundred pounds a year*? Who does not know, that a common barn is not worth, in the fee simple, a hundred pounds? Who does not know, that, at the place we are speaking of, a farm of a hundred acres together with barns, out-houses and farm-house, do not let for a hundred pounds a year? And, is it not monstrous, then, is it not enough to sting us to madness, to know that the mere shell of one of these barns should now cost us a hundred pounds a year, and that it should, for more than two years, past, have cost us two hundred pounds a year? Let inquiry be made as to the amount of the rent of these *farms*; and, my life on it, it will be found from the tax-gatherers books, that the rent that the public *even now* pays for the barns and out-houses. Is not this, then, a fit subject for inquiry? Is it not a fit subject for parliamentary inquiry? For instant inquiry? For inquiry not to be left to Boards of Commissioners? And, have not the public good reason to thank Mr. Rosson, who, in spite of Mr. Calcrafts' previous question, has brought about this most useful exposure?— But, while *Davies* and all the other persons concerned in the renting of these buildings, are to this hour in their places, what is become of Mr. *Atkins*, whose representation to the Secretary at War produced the great saving above stated? This unfortunate man, with a wife and several small children, is now in the deepest distress in London, haying scarcely anv means of procuring even the necessaries of life! He was dismissed, as was before observed, BY GENERAL FITZPATRICK, in the month of February last; that is to say, in a few «weeks *after* he had made a representation in consequence of which 833l. 6s. a year had, even upon the present scale (which is still much too high) been saved to the public; and, let it not be forgotten, that General Fitzpatrick had in his office, all the documents relating to this saving, and this highly meritorious act on the part of *Mr. Atkins*. OF the effect of a disclosure of these facts Lord Henry Petty seems to have been aware before he came down to the House to move for the adoption of Mr. Robson's motions; and, being thus aware, he moved, quite gratuitously, for a document relating to the *misconduct* of *Mr. Atkins*. That document, as constituting *the grounds of Mr. Atkins's dismission*, has been produced, and is now before me, And, the first impression that it made upon my mind, was, that of wonder at Lard Henry Petty's having thus given to this poor defenceless man so cruel a blow. I am sure the act never originated in his own pure mind. I am sure of it. It were to slander human nature to suppose that his lordship could have so acted from his own inclination; and, therefore, I do most sincerely acquit him of it. This document, upon which I will fully remark by-and-by, is an affidavit made to show, that Mr. Atkins himself was *a peculator*; that he wanted to borrow money, and that he actually did receive presents, from one of the barn-owners, But, first let us see the several letters relating to his dismission, whence it will appear, that he was accused in the dark; that he was dismissed without being confronted with his accusers before a competent tribunal; that, when he requested to be furnished with a copy of the documents, upon which he had been dismissed, the request was refused him; and that, the first sight he has ever obtained of these documents, has been in a paper laid before the House of Commons, and printed for the use of its members, a channel through which they must, according to established custom, naturally find their way to the public!

*Copy of a letter from the Sec. of War to the Barrack-Master General, dated War-Office, 15th Feb. 1806.*

Sir,—Having duly considered the several papers received in your letter of the 6th instant, respecting Mr. Atkins conduct as a Barrack Master, I cannot hesitate to determine upon the evident impropriety of his being any further employed at Sandown Barracks; and I shall accordingly submit to His Majesty the name of another officer for that situation. You will be pleased to communicate this letter to Mr. Atkins.—

(Signed) R. Firzpatrick


TO DO BELOW

Master General, to the bhigr Barrack Master in the Isle of Wight, dated, Barrack Office, 19th Feb. 1806.

Sir,— I am directed by the Barrack Master General to transmit to you; the enclosed copy of a letter from the Sec. at War, respecting Mr. Atkins, Barrack Master of Sandown, and to desire you will immediately communicate the same to him, and direct him to prepare to deliver up the barracks, and stores, now under his charge, to the person who may be appointed to succeed him. You will also direct him to prepare for closing his accounts with this office, as Barrack Master at Sandown, to the period, when the transfer of the barracks shall be made.—( Signed) P. Carey, Dty. B. M: Gi.

Copy of a Letter from. Mr. Atkins, to the Secretary ut War, dated Feb. 22d, 1800. Sir,—I have this day the honor to receive, through Captain Bygrave, your order communicated to the Barrack Master General; with respect for your decision, I must beg leave to appeal to: your liberality, to be made acquainted with those charges preferred against me; and 10 permit, me to stand 2 fair and candid trial. Unconscious that culpability could be attached to my_ pointing out situations where vast savings might have been made to Government, I stepped, perhaps, beyond the line of my duty, not aware of the consequence. (Signed) B.W ATKINS,

Copy of a Letter from the Deputy Secretary at War, to Mr. Atkins, dated, War Office, 27th Feb. 1800.

Sir,— In reply to your letter of the 22d instant, I am directed to acquaint you, that you were discharged from His Majesty's service in consequence of misconduct in the discharge of your duties as Barrack Master, and not as you erroneously conceive, from any statement you may have given with respect to the rates of barracks hired in the Isle of Wight —(Signed) F. Moomtsar * Sis GPL isi.

i ee > ch be Pa Pa: to''Mr, "Atkins

TO DO lots more



TO DO ABOVE

suffered, ought to do it; but, my hope is, that this distinction of feeling in the government and in the, public will never exist; and that the appearance of it, will, upon this occasion, be rendered impossible by the conduct of the government itself. As to the fact of his distress, they will not, I am sure, affect ignorance. They will read what I have here written, and when I tell them that I speak from my own knowledge, I know they will believe me. That he *may* have committed faults, I am by no means disposed to deny; but, to say nothing of the liability of us all to commit faults, what, let me ask, would be the fate of public officers in general, were they, for offences such as have been *alledged* against Mr. Atkins, to be punished as Mr. Atkins has been? What would be, nay, what *must* be, the consequence, if we take, as we are justified in taking, the decision against Mr. Atkins as a precedent for deciding with respect to the conduct of all other persons in places of public trust?
