# Smuggling Tales


https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0002569/18771020/055/0006
Isle of Wight Journal - Saturday 20 October 1877

AN ISLE OF WIGHT SNUGGLING CASE.

At the sitting of the Isle of Wight magistrates at Newport, on Saturday, David Cotton, fisherman, of Brixton, was charged with being on board a vessel named the Cloud, within a port of the United Kingdom, with a device adapted for the purpones of smuggling, on the 5th inst.—Mr. Henderson, Collector of Customs at West Cowes, prosecuted; Mr. Douglas Ford, of Portsmouth, defended.—Mr. Henderson, in his opening address, explained the nature of the offence, and pointed out that the punishment was forfeiture of the vessel and the infliction of a penalty not exceeding £100 upon every person found on board. On the vessel in question was found a warp 13 fathoms in length, with about 73 slings attached. On searching the wreck a large sinker was also found attached, and these he would prove by experienced officers were devices adapted for the purposes of smuggling. —The following evidence was then called: —George French deposed: I am chief boatman in charge of the Reath detachment, St. Catherine's Point station. I remember that early on the morning of Friday, the 5th inst, my attention was called to the movements of a small vessel proceeding eastward. I had the crew called out and approached her; Joseph Path was with me. I found her with her head to the north west on the rocks at Puckaster Point. I went on board, and on searching the vessel found a stray warp with tub slings attached. These slings are never used for any other purpose than running tubs. It was lying one part on the hatch and the other part in the hold. One of the hatches was off. It is a bran new warp, including the slings. It was wet when found, and had been lately in the water. I consider this warp is a device adapted for smuggling. I do not consider it could be used for any purpose connected with fishing or any other legitimate purpose. I have searched the wreck since then and found the sinker produced (a large piece of granite with rope similar to the slings attached.) It is used for sinking a warp with tubs attached to it. I have seen several warpd of the kind used for sinking goods and running tubs. I have seen seizures made whilst in one of the cruisers for the detection of smugglers. In making these seizures I have seen warps exactly like the one produced; fitted in the same way. I recognise the prisoner, whom I found lying across the hatches, with his feet hanging over the vessel's side, drunk. He could give no account of himself. The vessel was in a bad condition; fast filling with water. I made him a prisoner on suspicion of smuggling. After I had made him a prisoner he said, "I do not care a ———; we have got the tubs all right." I took him to the watch-house. At this time. I did not know his name. He told me John Chambers, of Freshwater. was with him, but it has since turned out that he was of Yarmouth. I found out the name of the vessel was the Cloud, of Cowes, which was painted on the piece of wreck produced.— By Mr. Ford: I have been in the coastguard eighteen years. I was never a fisherman. I am not accustomed to trawling. I can swear the piece of rope produced could not be used for trawling, because I have seen trawling gear and stood alongside while it has been fitted up. I have never actually trawled. I found a trawl net on board the vessel on the deck. I have heard of a stopper; it is used for stopping a trawl rope, stipping a cable, or running a rope. One stopper might be used for trawling; not 70. It could not be used for the purpose of trawling, as it is not fit for a ground rope, line net, or a trawl rope, because of the large number of stops. I have never seen stopper ropes of that thickness. There is no reason why a rope of this description could not be used for a stopper, because you can use any rope on board a ship for a stopper. There is no doubt it was used for the purpose of stopping the tubs. The rope produced was much too large for a stopper on board a little thing like the Cloud. A three-inch could be used for the purpose of a stopper. A three-quarter inch was too large for so small a vessel. Joseph Petty was with me when prisoner made the statement. It was made in the watch-room in reply to a question. I asked the prisoner where he came from, and where he was going. That was about two hours after I took him from the vessel. He was sober enough to make a statement. Two hours before he was so druuk that he could give no account of himself. The vessel went to pieces. I believe the owner of the vessel possessed a fisherman's license. There was not a strong wind blowing that night. There was a little ripple on the sea which might have come over a vessel of that size.—By the Chairman: It was a small vessel of about ten tons.—Joseph Petty, boatman in the Coastguard Service at St. Catherines Point Station, residing at Reath detachment, gave similar evidence to the previous witness, adding: The statement respecting the landing of the tubs was made on board the boat. Prisoner was sober when in the watch-house, and knew what he was doing. Prisoner said he had landed them in the bay, but he did not name any bay. Prisoner said he had come from Alum Bay, but nothing more was said to his knowledge.—By Mr. Ford: This was a clear night, and the ship was on the rocks. There was a little bit of a "chop" on. The vessel was about six or eight tons, but the sea would not go over when he saw it. There was not a stiff breeze when he boarded the vessel, about half past three o'clock that morning. There was a light breeze at one o'clock, but there was not sufficient sea to wash over the vessel. He was positive that the statement previously mentioned was made on the boat about ten minutes after they had left the vessel. French heard the conversation in the boat and in the watch-house too. I am not accustomed to trawling. The rope produced could not be used for trawling because the slings would be in the way, and it would be too awkward. They were not strong enough for stoppers. A stopper is not used for the purpose of easing the main rope. I cannot give any reason why the rope could not be used for trawlieg purposes.— By the Chairman: There were no fish found in the boat.—Cross-examined by Mr. Ford: I stayed on board half an hour until told by my superior officer to leave. There was no water where the net was. There were three feet of water in the hold.—Thomas Hunter, chief officer in the coastguard service at East Cowes, deposed: I have been in the coastguard service close upon seven and twenty years. Of that period I have been from 11 to 12 years in the Isle of Wight. I have had considerable experience with smuggling in the Island. The drag warp produced is exactly similar to what I have seen used for smuggling purposes. I will not swear it has been used for nothing else. —By the Chairmen: I have not found the same kind of rope on board other vessels besides those engaged in smuggling. -By Mr. Ford: I have seen trawlmg repeatedly. The rope produced could not be used for such purposes, because such stops are not required for trawling. There may be stops used for trawling purposes, but not such stops as those.—John Hayman, chief-boatman in charge of Shanklin station, deposed: I have seen similar pieces of rope to that produced and used for the purpose of smuggling. I have never seen it used for other purposes.—By Mr. Ford: I do not say it cannot be used for any other purpose.—Mr. Douglas Ford, in addressing the Bench for their defence, stated that of all prosecutions the most difficult to meet were those of the Customs, which were supported by a comprehensive Act of Parliament containing nearly 300 sections. They (the Bench) had, in addition to their duties as justices of the peace, to fulfil also to some extent the functions of a jury, and to come to an absolute conclusion upon the matter. First of all, did the statements of the witnesses correspond? He thought not. The first witness told them the prisoner was drunk when he went on board and when put into the boat. Afterwards prisoner was conveyed to the watch-house, and the witness told them not one word about a conversation taking place in the boat. Although the witnesses for the proseeution said the rope was used for the purposes of smuggling, yet of them would swear positively that it could not be used for any other purpose.—The Chairman: Then you see the Act is stringent; it does not say it shall be used for any purpose, but "any device adapted" for that one pursuit. I cannot see how much further you can go, the words are so stringent.— Mr. Ford agreed that the words were stringent, but still it did not do away with the fact that this piece of rope was on board for the purpose of assisting the prisoner in his business as a fisherman. He pointed out that because rope was said to be adapted for the purposes of smuggling they were not necessarily bound to come to the conclusion that the prisoner was guilty. Doubtless the rope might be used for smuggling, but he also contended that it was frequently used for purposes of trawling, to prevent too great a strain upon the net. He reviewed the evidence and urged that the facts were consistent with the theory advanced that the rope was used for the purpose of trawling, the owner of the vessel possessing a fisherman's license, a trawl net being found on board, and the uncontrevertible statement that the rope and its appendages might have been used for other purposes. They were there on very unequal terms, being hedged in and around by the stringent wording of this Act of Parliament. He commented upon the serious penalty should they convict his client, and urged that there was a strong doubt in the case, of which the prisoner should have the benefit. Mr. Ford submitted that according to the section they must have some proof of the knowledge or intention that it was used for the purpose. Even supposing it had been a yacht or any other vessel, would it necessarily be held that because it had these things on board it could be brought under the purview of that Act of Parliament and the owner be subjected to a penalty of £100? He then called the following witness: — George Barber, residing at Portsmouth, deposed: I have had 35 years' experience as a fisherman. The rope produced is used for trawling purposes on "tasty" or rocky ground. There are stoppers upon it and double-stoppers. The kick rope was the main or standing rope, with single and double stoppers. The bigger the vessel the bigger the stopper required. The number of stoppers depended on the ground where they were going to trawl. I have seen hundreds of such ropes used for trawling purposes.— The Chairman: Have you ever seen a trawling rope with stoppers placed so close together? — Witness: I have seen 50 stoppers on a rope.—By Mr. Ford: I do not know how many stoppers there are on the rope produced.—Mr. Henderson: In a fishing smack of six tons, what would be the length of a trawling rope? — Witness: It is according to the depth of water it is in sir.— Q. Supposing twenty fathoms of water? A. 60 fathems of rope.—Q. In a rope of 34 fathoms, how may stoppers would be used? A. It would very likely have 40 or 50 stoppers if on very rough ground. If the ground was clear it would not require any at all. I have never seen a stray warp.— The Chairman (Mr. T. Leach): We are decidedly and unanimously of opinion that there must be a conviction in the case. We think the Commissioners will he satisfied by our inflicting a penalty of £10 and £4 b15s. 5d. costs. Prisoner will be detained until the money is paid.— —John Chambers, fisherman, was charged with the same offence.—David Cotton, prisoner in the precedieg case, was the first witness called, and, having been cautioned, the clerk (Mr. Fardell) was examined by Mr. Henderson: I am a fisherman, residing at Brixton. The defendant is John Chambers, living at Yarmouth, who goes a fishing in the Cloud. She belongs to Yarmouth. The "Cloud: was painted on her stern. On being shown the piece of the wreck with the name, he said he could not read, so was not aware there was anything else upon it. On the morning ot the 5th, were you aboard the cloud?—Mr. Ford: I submit, with all possible respect, that the witness may be told he is not obliged to answer that question.—Q. Where were you on the morning of the 5th inst.— Mr. Ford: I advise you not to answer that queation. I take upon myself the responsibility. -Q. Do you remember seeing the defendant yesterday morning week? -Mr. Ford: I advise you not to answer. -The Chairman: If you continue stopping him like this, you might just as well close his mouth altogether. —Mr. Ford: That is just what I want to do, sir.-Q. Where were you yesterday morning week? A. On board a vessel.-Q. What vessel?-Mr. Ford: I tell you not to answer that question.-Witness, with some hesitation: The Cloud. I last saw Chambers on board that vessel when she struck. There was a boat at the stern of the vessel. I suppose the boat's name was marked upon it. I saw Chambers leave, but did not see on what direction.—Mr. Ford contended that as the Customs had obtained all they required from the witness, it was not becoming to press him farther.- James Aldridge, boatman in the coastguard at Shanklin, identified prisoner as the man he apprehended at Shanklin on the morning of the 6th inst.— In reply to witness, prisoner said he was the man who landed at Luccombe in a boat the morning before, but he at first denied it. The name of John Chambers, of Yarmouth, was upon the boat which was found at Luccombe Cove.— Silas Kemp, fisherman, residing at Luccombe, deposed that on the morning of the 5th inst., he was out fishieg about eight o'clock, and landed at Luccombe, heteeen eight and nine. There was a boat close to where they hauled theirs in. The boat had "Yarmouth" painted on the bottom. There were so many boats in there during the day that he did not know one from the other. When he got home he there saw a man having some breakfast. Prisoner was the man.— Captain Roach was the next witness called, but he did not answer.— The Chairman, at this point, stated that they decided to dismiss this case.


https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000540/19011226/123/0007
The Scotsman - Thursday 26 December 1901

A SMUGGLER'S DIARY

Is "Longman's Magazine" for January, Mr W. H. Hunt gives us some curious leaves from the diary of a fisherman, farm-hand, and smuggler, who lived in the Isle of Wight in the latter half of the eighteenth century.

Wheeler, says Mr Hunt, was a man of parts and of some little local importance. He owned a boat, fatted a pig or two yearly, and did an extensive trade in smuggled gin. School Boards were yet undreamed of and popular education barely existed in name; nevertheless, Robert contrived to acquire a little learning, and in a crabbed, crooked fist he kept a rough day-book, or diary, wherein he noted down from time to time some of the more important business transactions of his life. To the end he was unable to spell his own name correctly, and always wrote it as he pronounced it—Whiller. But there is no doubt it should have been Wheeler, for the Wheelers of Chale Bay are a numerous family even unto this day, when a local cricket eleven has been known to contain half a dozen of them. Robert Wheeler's diary is still extant.

They were stirring times in which Wheeler lived. The first year of his written record saw Boston Harbour black with British tea and the colonies of North America breaking into open revolt. Before the book closed, France had passed from a seething mass of unrest to some sort of settled government under the First Empire, and the Little Corsican had sent more than one thrill through the Isle of Wight and along the whole south coast of England by threats of invasion. Of all this Robert Wheeler says never a word. His is a purely domestic diary, dealing with the purchasing price of the gallon loaf, the selling price of a gallon of gin, the conveyance of prawns to the London market; the rates of wages paid for various kinds of farm service, and the cost of brewings of home-made ale.

Here and there, he speaks of a smuggling adventure, and once he refers to the purchase of a weekly paper as a noteworthy event, but not a word does he say, from first to last, of momentous affairs transpiring in the great world outside, nor is there the slightest indication of any perturbation on the part of himself or his fellow islanders at the chances of war or threats of invasion. Even the naval mutiny at Portsmouth, of which he must have heard a good deal, is passed over in silence, although he tells of large catches of mackerel disposed of in that town. It is true he lived in a "lotos land"— the Garden Isle of England,  where to-morrow is still as good as to-day— but we cannot suppose that he was entirely indifferent to all these external things. We can only assume that this diary, being pre-eminently a private affair, was limited strictly to private concerns.

But to the diary itself. In the year 1774 (continues Mr. Hunt), there is a charactoristic entry with some equally characteristic arithmetic.

March 5.—

I reseid of my wife won pound twelf and sixpence ........ ........ £1 12 6

She reseid of Mr Shofer thirteen shillings ........ 0 13 0

........ ........ ........ ........ 0 19 0

March 9.—
Had 18 shillings more of her....... 0 18 0

........ ........ ........ ........  1 16 0

Due to she ........ ........ ........ ........ 0 16 0

The true inwardness of this transaction is past finding out. It seems to imply that long before a Married Woman's Property Act was thought of Mrs Robert Wheeler of Chale had a separate estate, that she advanced to her husband £1. 12s. 6d., at the same time receiving on his account from Mr Shoter the sum of 13s., which should have left due to her from her husband 19s. 6d. Disdaining odd ha'pence, he sets down the balance as 19s. He then borrows an additional 18s., and enters the total debit as £1, 16s. How the final amount comes to be 16s. it is impossible to decide, unless it may be regarded as a mistake for the £1. 16s. repeated from above.

On April 3, in the same year, we get a glimpse of an eighteenth century fisherman's transactions with a firm of London fish salesmen; to which is added a note suggesting some uneasiness of mind on the part of the fisherman as to their bona fides.

"April 3, sent eight hundred and a quarter prawns to London to Mr Antony Brown & Son, salesman, tem street, ner Billinsgate, London. Not payd for."

Subsequently his mind was eased as to the honesty of Brown & Son, "Billinsgate," but he was somewhat doubtful as to the profitableness of the transaction. He writes:—

"I reseved nine shillings, which is all:..........d.  
"I payd for a basket to pack them......... 4  
"I payd carriage to Southampton ............ 6  
"I payd for salt for boilen them ............... 3  
"I payd for a letter come from London........ 9"

So that he had as the nett result of this transaction the modest sum of 7s. 2d., which is little enough when one remembers that prawns are now sold at Ventnor in season at from 4s. to 6s. a hundred, with no carriage to be deducted, or to London dealers, when scarce, at £1 per hundred. Unfortunately for Wheeler, there was no Ventnor in those days. Its site was occupied by a house and mill, and London, whether by lumbering waggons or the more expeditious stage-coach, was far to seek. It is worth noting that the cost of a letter from London was considerably more than the carriage of a fair-sized package of prawns from Chale to Southampton, by the shortest route a distance of thirty miles.

In the same month he records that

"James Whiller had of Willum Jollif a new pare of shoes, 6s. 8d."—an indication that if prawns sold ill and postage was excessive, shoes were, at any rate, proportionately cheap.

On December 16 he had a "pare of fore pieces, 1s."—toe-caps for his shoes. Then follows a long list of crabs and lobsters sold; crabs at 1 1/4d. a pound and lobsters at 3d. To-day crabs so sold fetch 6d. a pound and lobsters 1s.

Once the smuggler was severely bit. Under the year 1776 we read—

"March 29.—Gorge Brite, Barney Hale, and myself was robbed of our money on board a Dutch galiot hoy to the valey of seven pounds and fourteen shillings."

Detestable Dutchmen, to have taken such advantage of these confiding islanders! Picture "Gorge Brite, Barney Hale, and myself" setting out with due caution and money in hand to bargain with the crew of the Dutch galiot hoy, lying in the offing, for Dutch schnapps and other contraband articles, and the woebegone manner of their return without money and without goods.

Mr. Hunt writes—

In 1803 war was again declared against France, several thousand British tourists on French soil were thrown into prison, a hundred thousand troops lay at Boulogne waiting to invade England, and Robert Emmett— grandfather of Mrs Louis Botha—headed a new rebellion in Ireland. Wheeler's principal entry this year is "Willam Whiller killed my pig waid 13 score 15." He mentions that it was a bad year for crabs. He began fishing in March and ended in May, and he and his partner only earned £6, 8s. between them.

On January 14, 1804, he "bouth a quarter of a sack of flour for 11s. 3d." On January 17 for a sack of barley at Westside he paid 12s. 6d. On March 6 a quarter of a sack of fine flour cost him 9s. 9d. On February 15, 18, and 19 he "made a load of fus (furze) faggots at Kingston at Farmer Dyer's." By April 6 the price of flour had risen, a quarter of a sack costing 10s. 3d.

This year he was busily engaged in smuggling, and his book has the following, among other entries:—

"March 25. Tub of brandy ............. £1 17 0  
" "     Tub of gin ........ ......... 1 18 0  
"April     Left to pay at Gatten... 1 19 4  
" "     Tub of gin .................. 1 17 0  
"May    9. Reserved by cash at Gatten ...... 1 18 0  
"May   13. Ditto         ditto  1 17 0  
"May   18. For tub of gin ............ 1 19 0  
"June   12. Resed by cash ............ 2 0 0  
"June   13. Resed by cash ............ 2 0 0  
"June   28. Tub of gin ................. 1 18 0  
"August    Reseved by cash at Gatten .................... 2 0 0  
"August    Tub of gin .................. 1 17 0  
"         Tobacco ................... 0 2 0  
"         Had at Gatten tub of Brandy ................... 1 13 0  
"Aug.   14. Tub of gin ................. 1 17 0  
"Sept.     Gin in harvest ............ 1 19 0  
"Oct.    13. Tub of gin ................ 1 18 0  
"         Tub of gin ................ 1 18 0  
"Dec.    24. Tub of gin ................ 1 18 0"

A fairly good year's work in smuggled goods for a single customer.
