# Sophie Dawes

St Helens

https://archive.org/details/sophiedawesquee00montgoog/page/n2/mode/2up
Sophie Dawes, Queen of Chantilly
by Montagu, Violette M

Publication date 1912

Review: https://archive.org/details/TheAcademy82/page/n241/mode/2up?q=%22sophie+dawes%22+%22st+helens%22

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000150/18320105/002/0003
Worcester Journal - Thursday 05 January 1832

The proceedings relative to the Duke de Bourbon's will are still going on. It is said that the Baroness de Feucheres, (*alias* Sophy Dawes,) the daughter of a smuggler who resided in the Isle of Wight. While she was bar-maid at an inn in St. Helen's, the Duke of Bourbon saw, and became enamoured of her. She has lately purchased a considerable property at St. Helen's and has taken most of her relations to reside with her.


https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000494/18420423/021/0003
Hampshire Advertiser - Saturday 23 April 1842

TO DO

The Late Baroness de Feucheres.— The Civil Tribunal was on Wednesday occupied in hearing the defence ot the heirs of the Baroness, presented by M. Phillippe Dupin, their counsel, with M. Glandis, their atvoe, assisted by Mr. Lawson, their English solicitor. M. Dupin, the counsel for the heirs and neat of kin, commenced his pleading with a short sketch of the ?? of the late Baroness— her humble birth, her bigh elevation ln society at a subsequent period, and the painful circumstances which attended her latter years; but showing that from her birth to ber death she had uniformly fulfilled all the sacred duties of relationship to every branch and individual of her family, partaking with them in the misfortunes of their early poverty, making them partake In her future prosperity, dying in the arms of her sister and her nephew, and proving by her will that her anxiety for their welfare continued till the last period of ber life. But after her death — after a separation, about twelve years ago, pronounced by the justice of man, aod rendered perpetual by the band of God— the Baron de Feucheres came from his retirement to repudiate those whom he had accepted and treated as his afianced relations. The learned advocate then entered upon the history of the deceased Baroness and her family, of which the following ls a summary :— In the Isle of Wight lived Richard Daw, or Dawes, a sea-faring man, and Jane, his wife, who were married in 1775, as by certificate produced, and who, between that year and 1795, had ten children, all of whom had their baptisms entered in the Register of the parish of St. Helens, eseept Jobn Dawes, the eldest, and Sophy Dawes. This, however, arose from the extreme negligence with which the registers of the parish were kept during that period, as certified by the affidavits of Ilr. Young, the perpetual curate, of tbs clerk of the parish, and Mr. Biasteed, uotsry. Of their ten children, the only survivors to an age of maturity were James Dawes, Mrs. Clark, Mdme. Thanaron, aud Sophy, who afterwards became Baroness de Feucheres. The learned advocate then traced the career of the Baroness through her apprenticeship at CUff. in the Isle of Wight, her removal to Mlss Triggs' school, at Chelsea, up to 1815, when the change In her fortune took place, and she removed to Paris. M. Dupin next brought together a mass of overwhelming evidence, proving the recognition of all the members of her family by the Baroness, by the most affectionate aud attached manner, and read extracts from her correspondence to the same effect; that ahe had maintained and provided for her mother, Mrs. Dawes, ln comfort and every possible tenderness, was proved by the Superior of the Convent in which Mrs. Dawes bad, by ber own request, resided ; and a lock of her mother's grey hair snd ber last tooth hsd been found carefully preserved lv one of the Baroness* private drawers. Her father was equally the object of ber regard, having been placed by her under the care of Mr. James Adams, to whom she paid an ample allowance for ber father's comfort, as was proved by Mr. Adams's declaration. Her younger?? sister. Madame Thanaron, had been provided with a dowry of 4,000/. by the Baroness ; and her elder sister, Mrs. Clark, and her brother, Mr. James Dawes, were always the object of her marked affectlen, visiting them frequently. From Mrs. Clark's house she went to be married, and to it abe ultimately returned, that ?? sbe migbt, as in fact she did, die ln her arms. Mr. James Dawes, the brother of the Baroness, was likewise the object ol hsr sisterly love. His eldest soo, James, was provided tor by her, and through her Influence was created Bai on de Flassans. He was afterwards married to the daughter of Admiral Maaby. Thi* young roao died suddenly at Calai>. The Baroness had his remains taken to St. Helen's, her native place, snd there interred under a monument, on which was inscribed, that lt was erected as a mark of the affection of his aunt, the Baroness de Feucheres. Matilda Dawes, the daughter of Mr. James Dawes, was a lady of distinguished mind and manners, aod through the influence of her aunt was married to the Marquis de Chabaunes. a colonel in the army, and descended from one of the first families in France. Oa his marriage the Duke de Bourbon presented the bride with a fortune of 40.000/ as a mark of hi* esteem. the other children of James Dawes— namely, George, William. and Edward, have all been brought up at the charge of the Barones* de Feucheres, who purchased for William a commission in the English army. The only remaining member or the family to be noticed was Mademoiselle Thanaron. whom, as was already well-shown, the Baroness adopted, and Intended to be the inheritor of ibe great bulk of her property. M. Dupin iben read the will of the late Baroness de Feucheres, not only to show that she had named this young lady. Ma- demoiselle Thanaron, as her residuary legatee, but In the last serious act of her life retained ber consideration for all the members of her family, every one of whom is named in it. The Baroness died on the ISth March, 1840. snd ?? of her burial names her still Sophy Dawes, with the addition of Baroness de Feucheres. In arguing upon the facta or tta case, and In answer to an observation made by M . eh  d'E- tonge, at the last hearing, M. Dupin Irst ?? «»"• lefiectloaa eaat npon his clients, as to their comprise with Mile. Thanaron, which was beld ont as a proof that they were doubtful of the right of their claim. He, however, ?? that this was done upon another motive, that of not rendering the partial dispositions of the deceased totally •~™ve--a delicacy of conduct which he believed every we I thinking mind would duly appreciate. The learned counsel next pro cecded to comment in his turn upon the acts of ?? the Baron de Feucheres. from the very langusp ft _which he maintained, the Baron had no confidence in the legitimacy of his claim... M. Dupin then gave an able and conclusive sum- mary of the evidence of relationship of the claimants, and ?? armly commented on the conduct of the Baron de Feucheres In now denying the relationship of those of whom he had «o often spoken in terms of affection and regard, as was proved by his own letters, from which M. Dupin read extracts. the learned counsel finally disproved the reported prior marriage of the Baroness, and concluded a brilliant and powerful speech of three hours duration, leaving on the minds of the crowded Court the conviction that the case of the claimant* Is irresistable. The Court then adjourned. On Wednesday last the advocate for the Hospitals was to reply; after which, should time allow, M. Dupin was to conclude the defence. On Wednesday next, the Procureur dv Boi will snm up the facts of the case and expound the law, when the Judges, If satisfied, will give judgment. Should they, however, have any doubt, they will wail for the judgment of the Ecclesiastical Court In this country. The English suit was expected to proceed on the 20th instant. 


https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000082/18420429/030/0007
Morning Chronicle - Friday 29 April 1842

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0002408/18420425/057/0006
Morning Herald (London) - Monday 25 April 1842

TO DO

THE LATE BARONESS DE FEUCHERES. The Civil Tribunal was lately occupied in hearing the defence of the heirs of the baroness, presented by M. PIIILIPPE DUPIN, their counsel, with M. GLANDAZ, their avou6, assisted by Mr. LAWSON, their English solicitor. Tne court was crowded, and among the audience were numerous ladies. On the reserved bench were Messrs. Thanaron, Edward and William Dawes (the representatives of the late baroness), and Messrs. Odilon Barrot, Ganneron, and Lavaux; the executors named in her will. M. DUPIN, the counsel for tbe heirs and next of kin, commenced his pleading with a short sketch of the life of the late baroness—her humble birth, her high elevation in society at a subsequent period, and the painful circumstances which attended her latter years; but showing that from her birth to her death she had uniformly displayed the greatest affection and fulfilled all the sacred duties of relationship to every branch and individual of her family, partaking with them in the misfortunes of their early poverty, making them participate in her future prosperity, dying in the a rms of her sister and her nephew, and proving by her will that her anxiety for their welfare continued till the last period of her life. But after her death—after a separation, about 12 years ago, pronounced by the justice of man, and rendered perpetual by the hand of Go D—the Baron de Feucheres came from his retirement to repudiate those whom he had accepted and treated as his affianced relations. The learned advocate then entered upon the history of the deceased baroness and her family, of which the following is a summary. In the Isle of Wight lived Richard Daw, or Dawes, a seafaring man, and Jane, his wife, who were married in 1775, as by certificate produced, and who, between that year and 1795, had ten children, all of whom had their baptisms entered in the register of the parish of St. Helens, except James Dawes, the eldest, and Sophy Dawes. This, however, arose from the extreme negligence with which the registers of the parish were kept during that period, as certified by the affidavits of Mr. Young, the perpetual curate, of the clerk of the parish, and M. Binsted, notary, resident there. Of these ten children the only survivors to an age of maturity were James Dawes, Mrs. Clark, Mme. Thanaron, and Sophy, who afterwards became Baroness de Feucheres. Several of the children were taken into the charge of the guardians of the poor, and among them was Sophy, who entered the poor-house on 12th June, 1797, when six years old, her father engaging to pay two shillings a week towards her maintenance. On the register of the establishment there still exists the entry of her name, with those of her father and mother. On the 10th October, 1805, Sophy Dawes was apprenticed, by the overseers or guardians, to a farmer named Camp, at Clift, in the Isle of Wight. In the register of this occurrence the names of Richard Dawes and Jane, his wife, appear again as her father and mother. This fact is also attested by affidavits, and other attestations from six justices of the peace in the island, and by the rector of the parish of Carisbrook. In 1809, when Sophy Dawes was about 19 years of age, and up to which time her education had been necessarily confined, her family continuing to be in poor circumstances, her mother went to London, and obtained an appointment as matron in a lying-in hospital. Sophy was called to join her, and remained with her till 1811, when she was placed in the school of Miss Triggs, at Chelsea. In 1815, the great change in her fortune took place, and she came to Paris, taking up her residence in the Palais-Bourbon. Here M. Dupin detailed the circumstances of the marriage with the Baron de Feucheres to the same effect as the statement of M. Chaix-d'Estange at the last hearing, and of which we gave an account on Friday last, adding, that on her arrival in London she alighted at the house of her sister, Mrs. Clark. To prove the filial affection and duty of the baroness towards her mother, the learned counsel reminded the court of the fact of her having followed Mrs. Dawes to London when her fortunes were but very humble, and added the fact that the baroness, when her own station in society had become so much raised, brought her agent parent to Paris, and paid her every care and attention. In further illustration of this admirable conduct, M. Dupin read numerous extracts from letters written by the baroness to the Prince de Conde and her husband, in which she mentions her mother in terms of the deepest interest. At a later period Mrs. Dawes, the mother, expressed a desire to enter a nunnery, and the baroness, in compliance, placed her in the convent of Carmelites, paying a very liberal allowance for her board, and surrounding her with every comfort and indulgence that tenderness could suggest. This was attested by the depositions of the superior of the convent. The baroness, he added, had done more; she had founded a chapel in memory of her mother at the convent, and twelve annual masses to be performed for the repose of her soul. After a time Mrs. Dawes wished to return to England, and the baroness placed her in the convent at Hammersmith, paying 200/ a year for her board. When Mrs. Dawes died, the baroness was severely afflicted. She ordered masses for the repose of her soul to be performed in the chapel of the convent at Hammersmith, where she died, and in the church at Mortefontaine. She required to be sent to her a lock other mother's grey hair, and her last tooth, which she kept carefully till her own death, after which it was found preserved in one of her private drawers. This pious tenderness, continued the learned advocate, was not limited by the Baroness de Feucheres to her mother alone. Charlotte Dawes, her youngest sister, who afterwards became Mine. Thanaron, and the mother of Sophy Thanaron, her intended residuary legatee, was placed in a school in London, and kept there till 1828, at the sole charge of the baroness. On September 6 in that year Charlotte was married to M. Thanaron, in the presence of her two sisters, Mrs. Clark and the baroness; the latter giving her a dower of 4,000/, which was settled upon her. When, in 1829, Mme. Thanaron was delivered of a still-born child, the grief of the baroness was excessive ; and when, in 1830, her sister was again near her accouchement, she was attended by the most eminent of the faculty till a daughter was born, to whom the baroness gave her name of Sophy, and whom she adopted. M. Dupin then noticed the circumstances attending the engagement by the baroness, at Genoa, of Bianca Milisi, the wife of Dr. Moyon, to be the governess of her niece, or rather daughter by adoption. This, as our readers will recollect, gave rise to differences betviteen the baroness and Dr. Moyon, ending in a suit, of which we gave a report at the time it took place. The learned advocate produced letters from the baroness to M. Thanaron, speaking in the most affectionate terms of her niece Sophy, and clearly intimating her intention of constituting her adopted child to be her heiress. As to Richard Dawes, the father, M. Dupin stated that he could never be induced to give up his habits of life, and leave the Isle of Wight. But when he became aged and infirm the baroness placed him under the care of a person named James Adams, to whom she paid an ample allowance, as testified by the declaration of Adams. With Mrs. Clark, her sister, the baroness always remained upon the most affectionate terms. From this sister's house she went to be married, and to it she ultimately returned, that she might, as in fact she did, die in her arms. Mr. James Dawes, the brother of the Baroness de Feucheres, was likewise an object of her sisterly love. His eldest son, James, was placed by her in the establishment of the Duke de Bourbon, who soon became attached to him, made him his equerry, and purchased for him an estate, which gave him the title of Baron de Flassans. He was afterwards married to the daughter of Adm.Manby. This young man died suddenly at Calais. The baroness had his remains taken to Saint Helen's, her native place, and there interred under a monument, on which was inscribed that it was erected as a mark of the affection of his aunt, the Baroness de Feucheres. Matilda Dawes, the daughter of Mr. James Dawes, was a lady of distinguished mind and manners, and through the influence of her aunt was married to the Marquis de Chabannes, a colonel in the army and descended from one of - the first families in France. On this marriage the Duke de Bourbon presented the bride with a fortune of 40,000/ as a mark of his esteem. The other chil- ' dr - en — Of James Dawes—namely, George, Willian;:, and Edward have all been brought up at the charge of the Baroness de Feucheres, who had purchased for William a commission in the English army. The only remaining member of the family to be noticed was Mdlle. Thanaron, whom, as was already well known, the baroness adopted, and intended to be the inheritor of the great bulk of her property. M. Dupin then read the will of the late Baroness de Feucheres, not only to show that she had named this youn g l a dy, Mademoiselle Thanaron, as her residuary l ega t ee , b ut i n t h e last serious act of her life retained her consideration for all the members of her family, every one of whom is named in it. The baroness died on 15th March, 1840,and the register of her burial names her still Sophy Dawes, with the addition of Baroness de Feucheres. In arguing upon the facts of the case, and in answer to observations made by M. Chaixd'Estange at the last hearing, M. Dupin first replied to the reflection cast upon his clients, as to their compromise with Mdlle. Thanaron, which was held out as a proof that they were doubtful of the right of their claim. He, however, affirmed that this was done upon another motive, that of not rendering the partial dispositions of the deceased totally abortive—a delicacy of conduct which he believed every well-thinking mind would duly appreciate. The learned counsel next proceeded to comment in his turn upon the acts of donation by the Baron de Feucheres, from the very language of which, he maintained, the baron had no confidence in the legitimacy of his claims. The next point in the advocate's speech was the validity of the evidence as to the relationship of his clients and the deceased baroness. In France, he said, the great care and exactitude o f th e mag i s t ra t es ren d ere d omissions in the Etat-Civil, or records of births, marriages, and deaths, extremely rare, and the entries very correct and precise. In England, the errors and omissions were more frequent, but they were all to be rectified according to the law of the country, by extraneous evidence on oath, and in support of this assertion quoted opinions given by the Queen of England's Attorney and Solicitor General, adding that these great law officers of the Crown, who had laid a claim to the estates and property of the deceased, on the ground that she had died intestate, and without lawful heirs, had suspended that claim, being convinced of the justice of that made by the family now represented before the tribunal by him, M. Dupin. Admitting, however, he continued, that the filiation of the baroness might for a moment be doubtful, the Baron de Feueheres had repeatedly by his acts and writings fully acknowledged it. It was not for him, the advocate, to explain or divine the reasons which induced the late baroness to assume the character of widow . at the time of marriage; but that she was not so had been inc on t est ibl y proved, first by search in the registers at the Cape, where the death of no such person as 'William Dawes could be found; and in those of the East India Company, on which neither did any such name appear. Equally fr u itl ess a l so were long and tiiinute i searches n the registers of Southampton, at which place the baroness, at the time of her marriage, stated herself to have been born as the daughter of Richard Clark and Jane Walker. Consequently, it was evident that the whole was a fiction. In terminating his pleading on this part of the case, M. Dupin remarked that, although the assumed widowhood was an undeniable fiction, the family feelings of the baroness vier ti e j as on all other occasions displayed. She had retained her own names—had given to her imaginary father t, Christian name of her real one, with the surname of which was that of her sister; and to her supposititious ther that of her real parent Jane, with the surname of ° d her nieces, which was Walker. In concluding his long admirable speech, the learned counsel said, "As to claim of the hospices, I will solemnly affirm that the Pe.t rl mony of the poor ought never to be augmented by As to the apprehension of seeing French property pass In the hands ot foreigners, let it be recollected that M. naron is a Frenchman, and that his daughter, Sophy naron, is also a native of France. For those who ar9 French, remember, gentlemen, that foreigners are privile,ge'A persons in France, when they come to demand justice. The Tribunal adjourned the hearing till Wednesday next, when M. Chaix d'Estange will plead in behalf of hospices. 