# The Spithead Mutiny

---
Portsmouth Evening News - Thursday 15 April 1897
100 years on...
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000290/18970415/015/0002

THE SPITHEAD MUTINY. NOTABLE CENTENARY.  
THE STORY OF A GREAT STRUGGLE.

To-day (Thursday) is the centenary of the mutiny at Spithead. It was on Saturday, April 15th, 1797, that Lord Bridport, who commanded the fleet at Spithad, consisting of sixteen ships of the line, hoisted the signal to prepare for sea, but, instead of proceeding to weigh anchor with that promptness so characteristic of the men of the Royal Navy, the seamen of the Queen Charlotte ran up the shrouds and gave three cheers, an example that was followed by the rest the fleet. All efforts on the part of the officers to induce them to return to their duties were in vain, for the spirit of mutiny had taken root in their breasts, and the careful organisation of their plans made it evident that they were the result of far more reflection than the wayward mind of a Jack Tar of that period was usually given credit for. But before entering on particulars of this great national event it may be as well to see what was the position of the British Navy at that time and what was the lot of the British seaman.

A SECOND ARMADA.

In 1797 we were war with France, Spain, and Holland, and though we had in commission 124 ships of the line, with 382 other ships, the combined fleets of the enemy outnumbered ours. Besides, our force, though great, was scattered over the face of the Globe, like it is now in fact, so that we had only 18 ships of the line under Lord Bridport the Channel, 15 under Admiral Jervis off Coruna, and 15 under Admiral Duncan off the Texel, in all 48, against the 65 or 70 which the enemy could combine against us. It was only in the previous year that, at the invitation of the Irish rebels, the French attempted the invasion of Ireland with 17 ships of the line, 13 frigates, and seven transports, carrying 20,000 men, under the command of General Hoche, but the expedition was altogether unsuccessful, aud the fleet was wrecked or  scattered, fortunately for this country, as at the moment we had neither ships nor army to meet the enemy. A far greater effort was, moreover, crushed in its inception soon afterwards. It had been calculated that by a junction of ihe Dutch, the Spanish aud the French fleets, another and more fortunate Armada might effect the invasion of England, but in a brilliant victory off Cape St. Vincent Sir John Jervis defeated the Spanish fleet on its way to join the French fleet at Brest, so that the Armada and the invasion of England never came off. The Spaniards had 27 large snips, but Sir John did not hesitate to attack them with his 15.

These facts are sufficient to show by what a slender thread the Naval supremacy ot England was held at that time.

One would have thought, therefore, that those splendid fighting machines, the English sailors, who had shed their blood like water, swept their country's foes from every sea, and had earned a deathless glory for the Navy of Great Britain, would never have been treated witn cruelty, injustice, and oppression. Unfortunately, anyone who studies the particulars that come to hand from various sources about the mutinies at Spithead and the Nore will be compelled to admit that the seamen did suffer not only oppression, but gross injustice and cruelty— not from the nation though, who loved its sailors, but those in authority over them, and through departmental mal-administration.

THE PRESS-GANGS.

Commencing at a period of our Naval history when slavery was universally tolerated and liberty, comparatively speaking, unknown, the arbitrary system of impressment formed the principal means of manning the Navy. All tht chief cities and villages of the kingdom were subject to incursions of armed men who swept up for the noblest uses of the country all who came within their reach. Merchant seamen coming home from long and tedious voyages, and longing for the comforts home, were seized in the Channel, at the Nore, or St. Helen's, dragged to the tenders, and hurried off abroad. But the press gang, as it scoured the streets of our towns, really brought very few good men to the Service.

FIVE HUNDRED CAPTURED AT HASLAR.

Of course, the press gang was severely felt at Portsmouth, nor were the methods adopted particularly straightforward. Here is an incideni taken from Slight's " History of Portsmouth," and it shows how 500 men were taken at one haul. The account is under date 8th March, 1803. It says :—" Captain Bowen ten o'clock at night assembled a party of Marines with as much noise and parade as possible, to march to quell a pretended riot at Haslar. As the news spread hundreds of people ran to see the expected affray, and Captain Bowen no sooner saw his object was attained than he placed a party of Marines at the ends of Haslar Bridge and took every man that answered his purpose."

Another illustration, from the " Naval Chronicle " of March 9th, 1803 :—" The Press continues very active in Portsmouth. Large parties of seamen were ordered ashore in separate gangs last night, and so peremptory were they, that they indiscriminately took out every man on board of the colliers, etc. Early this morning, the same bustle was repeated, and several gangs paraded Point and picked up many useful hands and lodged them in the guardhouse of the Grand Parade." Another crying grievance was the drafting into the Navy of the scum of the gaols and sending them on board ships, where they harassed good officers by their neglect of duty aud poisoned the minds of good seamen by their seditious treasonable projects.

THE FOOD ABOMINABLE.

But in many other respects the seaman had much to complain of. His food and water supply were abominable. He was badly paid, badly fed, and treated in a tyrannical manner. Punishments were frightfully severe, the offence being visited with the most cruel corporal punishment, against which there was no appeal. The pay of an able-bodied seaman, which had not been raised since the time of Charles II, was then only 9 3/4d a day (about half what it is now), and was often long in arrears, and the food was not only bad, but was so reduced by deductions made by the purser, whose pay was principally derived from that source, that it caused great dissatisfaction, as the pound instead of beins 16ozs. was never more than 14ozs., and often only 12ozs. Well authenticated cases are mentioned in which salt beef, preserved and packed in casks during many years of voyaging to and fro in different parts of the world, imbibed so much of the mineral in which it was pickled that at last it became as susceptible of polish as the agate or cornelian, and was wholly devoid of flavour or nutriment. The biscuits served out to the men were generally full of weevils and as hard as flint, while the water, then carried in casks, was short in quantity and bad in quality. Often decomposition had set in, and the water swarmed with putrescent life. Leave was almost unheard of, the men being kept at sea for very long periods without chance of putting foot ashore. Another crying grievance was the unequal distribution of prize money, and a case is mentioned which the Admiral commanding received £7,800 and able seaman only 19s.

ROUND ROBIN: THE MEN COMPLAIN.

Such was the condition of things among the seamen of the British Navy at the latter end of February, 1797. Lord Howe, who was then in command of the Channel Fleet, while staying at Bath, received sundry petitions from the seamen at Portsmouth, in the form of a " Round Robin," but believing that they had emanated from a few dissatisfied individuals, without faithfully representing the general sentiments of the fleet, especially as most of them were in the same handwriting, the noble Lord merely put the petitions in the waste paper basket. The frequency of these communications, however, at length caused the Admiral to think there must be some discontent among the men, and he, therefore, directed Sir H. Seymour, who was in command at Portsmouth, to make inquiries on the subject. The answer was " that the whole affair was the work of a few mischievous persons to bring discredit on the Government." Lord Howe was not satisfied, but was unable to arouse the Admiralty to the extent of the danger. The delay only angered the men, and and they lost confidence in the gallant Commander-in-Chief, who had previously been one of the most popular officers in the Navy. They believed that he was the cause of their hardships remaining unredressed. Thus matters wore on, the seamen making their plans, being fully determined that nothing short of the prompt admission and removal of at least two of their grievances—their small pay and the more equal distribution of prize-money—would satisfy them.

THE MUTINY.

This brings us back to the memorable 15th of April, when the seamen of the Channel Fleet at Spithead openly defied their officers. On the following day (Easter Sunday) the insubordination broke out into open mutiny. A deputation of four seamen from each ship assembled on board the Queen Charlotte (flagship), and they met in the Admiral's cabin, where they discussed what steps were most suitable for the emergency. The next day every man in the fleet was sworn to support the cause, ropes were reeved, *ad terrorem*, at the fore yards of each ship, as a reminder to all who would dare break through their regulatins, and all those officers who, in the opinion the men, had been guilty of oppression, were sent ashore. The 32 delegates met daily on the flagship, and throughout strict discipline was maintained. It was on Tuesday, the 18th, that the delegates drew up and forwarded from the Queen Charlotte two petitions, one to Parliament and the other to the Admiralty, in which their complaints and demands were set forth.

THE MEN'S DEMANDS.

Looking at all the surrounding circumstances, a candid reader of these petitions will be bound to admit that they were not only couched in respectful languag, but that the demands were themselves most reasonable. Stated briefly, they were that the pay of able seamen should be increased from 22s. 9d. per lunar mouth to 30s. per calendar month, or 1s. a day instead of 9 3/4d., the pay to be made regularly every three months, and not in paper. With respect to the prize money, the demand was that one-third of all prizes taken should be distributed among the men. That, in future, provisions should be weighed out sixteen ounces to the pound instead of twelve, and that they should be better quality. That their measures should be the same as those used in commercial trade. That vegetables instead of flour should be served out with fresh beef when the ships were in any port under the British flag. That the sick should be better attended to, and that they should be allowed necessities, which should on no account be embezzled. That the men wounded action should have their pay continued till they were cured or discharged. That men might have on returning from sea more leave granted them to visit their families or friends, and that any other real grievance complained of should be redressed.

NO HALF MEASURES.

A few days later a committee of the Board of Admiralty arrived at Portsmouth, and endeavoured to meet the men half way by proposing to recommend the King to increase seamen's wages by 4s. 6d. a month and to continue the pay of the wounded until cured or discharged, but ignoring everything else. The seamen, however, refused to listen to such half measures and they persisted in refusing to lift anchor until all the grievances were redressed and an act of indemnity passed. The Admiralty then gave way, conceding most of the requests, and with this the seamen expressed their satisfaction. It was hoped that the trouble was now over, and at the order of the Admiral the greater part of the fleet dropped down to St. Helen's, only two of the ships holding out. A feeling confidence returned, but it gradually dawned upon the delegates that no guarantee had been mentioned either of the King's acquiescence in the recommeadatious of the Commissioners or of the ratification of the Articles by Parliament; and as they had jeopardised themselves by their cause of action, they soon came to the conclusion that nothing short of an unconditional pardon under the King's sign manual would satisfy them. This feeling of discontent was increased by the fact of the First Lord of the Admiralty in Parliament declaring that he was not aware of any message likely to come before Parliament on the subject. In consequence the men began to lose faith in the promises made them, especially as the conduct of some of the officers command was quite as tyrannical as before. The Admiralty also made matters worse by directing that the whole of the Marines should be kept under arms to repress disturbances.

THE SECOND OUTBREAK.

At length the delegates formally intimated to the Admiralty and to their ottlcers that nothing short of their demands being granted in full, with their full and unconditionai pardon, would satisfy them. At the same time the ominous " red flag " was once more hoisted. Enraged at this Lord Bridport ordered his own flag to be hauled down, declaring that the two should never fly together. But the men were firm, and their committees and delegates once more took command. The guns of each ship were loaded, and the officers were put under arrest, while a watch was kept as if in the presence of an enemy.

It was evident that the organisation of the mutiny had been gradually developed, and that it was controlled by men of no ordinary understanding, for their influence over their comrades was perfect. Their orders were implicitly obeyed. Throughout the most perfect discipline and good order were easily maintained, and all thefts and such-like offences were rigorously punished.

Another open act of mutiny occurred on May 7th. Having heard that the French Fleet had put to sea Lord Bridport made the signal to weigh and put to sea, but every ship in the fleet refused to obey his orders on the ground that no public step had been taken by the Government towards the fulfilment of those promises by which the Admiralty were bound.

MUTINEERS SHOT.

An incident now occurred which tended more than anything else to embitter the men egalnst their officers. The delegates assembled and proceeded to the London, Admiral Colpoy's ship, with the intention of holding their convention there. The Admiral ordered them to sheer off, but they persisted, notwithstanding this warning. While they were attempting to gain the sides of the ship the Admiral ordered the officers and Marines to fire into the boats, the consequence being that five men were killed and six others badly wounded. The effect of this act upon the crew of thel London was magical. They rushed in crowds up the hatchways, overpowered the officers and disarmed the Marines. They seized the First Lieutenant, Mr. Peter Bover, who had shot and killed a seaman for having unlashed one of the guns and tried to turn it towards the quarterdeck, aud were proceeding to hang him at the yard-arm, when Admiral Colpoys, interfering, told the enraged men that he alone was to blame, as the Lieutenant was acting under his orders, grounded on instructions received from the Admiralty. These instructions the delegates demanded, and they were at once handed over to them. By their orders the officers were then imprisoned in their own cabins. Admiral Colpoys fully expected to be hanged by the mutineers, and he prepared for such an event by making a will, in which he left annuities of £20 to the widows of those whose husbands had been killed in the affray. The Mayor of Prtsmouth (Sir John Carter), however, intervened, and at his request the Admiral was sent ashore, where he was a guest at the Mayor's residence. But he did not reach the shore without a hot pursuit by the boats of the Mars, the crew of which ship showed themselves very vindictive, and held out to the last.

EXCITING SCENES IN OLD PORTSMOUTH.

The scene at Portsmouth in connection with the burial of those killed in the boarding of the London is one of the most stirring in connection with this most painful episode in the Naval history of our country. It is graphically described by Mr. Saunders in his "Annals of Portsmouth." He says:—" The sailors wished to bury the dead bodies of the men shot on board of the London, who had died at Haslar of their wounds, at Kingston Churchyard, passing in procession through the town of Portsmouth. The request was most positively refused by the Governor, and the town was put into position to repel any attack from the fleet, as the sailors were determined to carry out their plans. The batteries were manned and furnaces for heating red hot shot were got out and lighted along the wall near the Spur Redoubt (afterwards called the Hot Walls, in consequence), and resistance on both sides would have taken place but for the calmness and forbearance of the Mayor (Sir John Carter), who compromised the affair by obtaining permission for the bodies to be landed at Common Hard. Sir John accompanied them through the garrison to prevent any insult. Mr. Godwin, one of the Magistrates, also joined the procession till it passed the fortifications. An immense crowd of people assembled along the whole line of the procession. Two colours preceded the first coffin, and one each of the others, half-struck, while 50 of their shipmates followed, two and two together, with, nearly as many women in black, and six women walked the side of each coffin."

At that time Portsmouth was nearly denuded of troops, so that had the dispute been settled by force it is doubtful which side would have the best of it. The old town conld hardly have been a pleasant place to live in, for Dr. (afterwards Sir Jamesj McGregor, of the 88th Regt., which was suddenly ordered into tie garrison from Peterstield, mentions in his memoirs that on the arrival of the regiment they found great bodies of troops assembling, and everything in a most critical state on board of the fleet, the officers having been sent on shore and the crews' delegates ruling everything at Spithead. Great numbers of the sailors were on shore, roaming the streets aud the neighbouring country in a mutinous and drunken state, their language and conduct being most insubordinate and treasonable. At this time it was not thought prudent to interrupt them much, for the greater part of the inhabitants of Portsmouth and its neighbourhood, with the dissolute females of the town and the keepers of public houses and slop shops, appeared to be of their party. Still, troops were pouring daily into Portsmouth and we foresaw that the action was approaching.

THE FINAL SETTLEMENT.

The news of the fresh mutiny created a panic in London, and at last the Government was seriously alarmed, while Mr. Pitt, seeing the danger of further delay, brought a Bill in the House of Commons far granting additional pay and allowances to the seamen. It was hurried through all its stages im the course of twenty-four hours, and Lord Howe was sent down to Portsmouth charged with extraordinary powers for the final settlement of the whole matter in dispute, and bearing with him the King's proclamation and full pardon. Immediately on his arrival he went on board the Royal George, Lord Bridport's flagship, and after visiting most of the other ships, he finally, in conjunction with the Port Admiral, met the delegates on board of the King William, when matters were finally arranged. The men then returned to their duty, four post captains aud 18 lieutenants who had made themselves especially obnoxious being removed from their positions at the request of the men.

THANKS TO LORD HOWE.

A circumstance occurred soon afterwards which was considered all sides as a tacit acknowledgment by the Government that they had been wrong in their previous treatment of the seamen. The delegates requested and obtained permission (after the King's pardon had been duly received), to row procession to St. Helen's, attended by bands of music, and there to return public thanks to Lord Howe for his services and for his conciliatory behaviour while conducting this delicate business to a satisfactory result. Accordingly the procession and rejoicing took place on May 15th, just month after the outbreak. The delegates landed at Sally Port, and headed by a band of music, they marched to Government House, where they partook of refreshment. Accompanied by Lord and Lady Howe, the Governor and Lieutenant-Governor, and other officers of distinction, they then embarked in barges, and on their arrival at St. Helen's Lord Howe visited several ships, and received the thanks of the crew. He then went oa board the Prince, the flagship of Sir Roger Curtis, at Spithead, when the ship displayed the Union Jack and Standard as a signal of restoration of order and obedience. At six o'clock Lord Howe landed, and he was received with acclamation by an immense concourse of people and sailors. The enthusiasm of the latter exceeded all bounds. The venerable Admiral, who was infirm under the weight of years, was carried on the shoulders of the delegates to Government House, where he and Lady Howe entertained them at dinner.

MORE REFORMS.

But a more complete admission the wrong and injustice to which the men had been previously subjected was to be found in the Admiralty Order issued after the Mutiny in May, 1797. In it great stress was laid on the directions to pay particular attention to the regulations as to provisions. Officers were told that they were not to select the choicest pieces of the meat for themselves from that which was cut up for the ship's company, nor were they to take the best pieces of salted beef from the men's tub ; nor were they to take the spirits intended for the men ; nor were surgeons to be allowed to take out of the ship medicines or necessaries intended for the use of the sick, but to apply them to their proper use. It was alao ordered that the ships companies should be rated according to merits of the men in order that those most deserving should get the better pay.

So ended the famous Spithead Mutiny. It was a critical moment in the nation's history. The men saw their advantage in their country's danger, and they seized it. Owing to their splendid organisation they were enabled to obtain all they had asked for. That they had been shamefully used there can be no denying, but whether the end justified the means is another matter. The mutiny at the Nore followed that at Spithead, but it failed, and the ringleaders were hanged. In that case, though, some of the demands were hardly justified, especially as the concessions to the Spithead mutineers were intended for the fleet at large.

[For the foregoing account of a great historical event we are largely indebted to Mr. William H. Saunders, the Curator of the Borough Museum, who kindly placed his manuscript notes at our disposal, and to Mr. George Long, J.P., who supplied us with a copy of an interesting paper upon the subject, read by him some years ago before the Portsmouth Literary and Scientific Society.]

---
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000290/18931124/003/0002
Portsmouth Evening News - Friday 24 November 1893

NAVAL MUTINIES.  
LECTURE AT PORTSMOUTH.

A well-attended meeting of the Portsmouth Literary and Scientific Society was held in the Grand Jury-room at the Town Hall on Thursday evening, the chair being occupied by the President, Major-General A. W. Drayson, R.A., F.R.A.S.

A paper " The Mutinies Spithead and the Nore in 1797" was ready by Geo. Long, J.P. At the time of the outbreak, said the lecturer, the English seamen were badly paid, badly fed, and treated in a most tyrannical manner. Their pay had not been raised since the time of Charles II, when was 9 3/4d per day, le*s than half of what it is to-day. The food was bad quality and deficient in quantiyy, owing to the peculations of the pursers, who often made a fortune by underfeeding the men. The salt junk at times became so impregnated with salt as to lose all flavour and to be susceptible of a polish like agate cornelian. The biscuits were too often full of weevils. The water also was bad, and leave was almost unknown, even after long absence abroad. The Centrion was kept for 12 years at a stretch at the India Station. The prize money was very unequally divided, and the pressgangs made raids upon the maritime towns, which resembled more the raids of Arab slavers than the recruiting operations of a civilised nation. Severe corporal punishment in the shape of brutal floggings was also inflicted at the caprice of the commanders for the slightest breach of discipline. This might have been necessary to some extent, however, owing to the fact that the ships were often manned by the sweepings of the gutter and of the convict prisons. Under such conditions it could hardly be matter for surprise that a mutiny should take place. After tracing in detail tha history of the mutinies, the lecturer showed the great improvement that had been effected with regard to the position of the seamen within the past half-century, and said that the nation should take care that there should never be an excuse for such things happening again. Grievances should at once be inquired into, and if necessary remedied. The law of impressment had never been repealed, but he thought it would never be needed as the conditions were so much improved as to attract men to the Navy.

In referring to the diffrence in the position of the seaman now as compard with 1797, the President said that British seamen were now treated properly and humanely, and were, therefore, a respectable body of men, and their wives were good, respectable women. (Loud applause.)— General Harward proposed, Mr. Lewis seconded, and Mr. G. L. Green supported, a vote of thanks to the lecturer and tha President, which was carried by acclamation, and the meeting then terminated.


---
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000388/17970627/007/0004
Chester Courant - Tuesday 27 June 1797

ORIGINAL LETTER, LATELY RECEIVED FROM THE FLEET AT PORTSMOUTH.

DEAR PARENTS, St. Helens, May, 1797.

I hope you have not been unhappy about us. I will now tell you the whole truth and proceedings. Last December I received a letter from the Royal George on Christmas day from one of my old ship-mates. What they wanted, viz. *two shillings* a month advance of wages. I passed this to every birth in the ship ; all hands agreed it. We drew up a petition, and sent it to Earl Howe ; he took no notice of it. `[He Lordship has sinc satisfactorily explained HIS OWN conduct.]` On Feb. 18, we sent him another, and to the Lords of the Admiralty—no answer. I, as well as the rest, made it known to all the fleet in as secret a manner as possible, and Easter-Tuesday was the day fixed to rise through the fleet at eight in the morning, and any ship that refused was to be sunk immediately. Our officers got hint of it, and our Lieutenant called all hands, and told us we should have liberty to go on shore next week, and several more deceitful promises as before, we gave him three cheers, and the other ships hearing us, they thought we had begun ; they ran up the rigging, but they did not cheer : three that afternoon, Saturday, April 15, the signal was made for us to unmoor, we all went between the decks and gave three cheers, and lowered the ports ; the other ships heard us, they manned, and the whole fleet, in ten minutes, gave three cheers— *twenty two thousand* men all of one mind ! this was a dieadful, but most glorious fight ! now we knew every man's mind. At eight, Easter Sunday morning, we sent up top-gallant yards. We now demanded the keys of the magazine, and all the keys of the ship—our Captam resigned them. We now all cleaned ourselves and went to prayers, and a sermon was preached ; and while that was preaching, a boat went from every ship and formed a line, and took two men from every ship, chosen by the company, to go on board the Queen Charlotte to settle every thing; we called them delegates ; after church was over, we rove two ropes at our fore yard arms, to hang the first man that flinched : this alarmed our officers ; we now chose two privy counsellors, and a committee. I was chosen president of the committee composed of six men. At four that afternoon, we held a court-martial to try our captain and all our officers. I was mounted on a stage on the forecastle, like a judge ; we now ordered every officer to assemble— the captain first ; he made a long speech, and we gave him answer, reprimanded him, and let him go. We tried all the rest, and we sent on shore our doctor, two lieutenants, two masters' mates, three midshipmen, and were very near hanging our purser, but we cleared him. We tried our *parson* next, gave him a severe reprimand, made him take our oath, *and never to get drunk more ; to read prayers and preach a sermon every Sunday*. I passed his sentence. We tried the boatswain, and he was cast by consent of all hands ; our rope going round his neck, his little son cried, and asked me what we was going to do with his daddy ?—I thought of my little fellows, it cut me to the heart to hear his little innocent son speak— he could not speak himself—his son is about seven, and knowing me better than any other person, he cried to me. — I called our committee and council aside, and begged his life, he having a wife and four children on shore—it was done. The next was Mr. ————, our carpenter, who behaved so well to you.— Every carpenter said there was a charge against him. It cut me when I saw him down on his knees, and the tears running down his wrinkled face, and his white hair and bald head— a man who had been round the world, and twenty-eight years in the service, an able workman, to be tried by British tars : — He asked our pardon, and made several long speeches, and said he was obliged to support a mother eighty-nine years of age, a wife, and seven sons and daughters. All this I weighed in my mind, and his kind behaviour to you when you was on board. I begged his life, and he was reprieved, taking our oath never to strike a man, nor complain of any man, as did the boatswain. I had very near been hanged for shewing such partiality to both of them. We tried the gunner, surgeon, mate, &c. and after all was over, made them ail stand in a line, and take our oath, beg our pardon, and we reprieved them; and sent the others on shore, to be dismissed his Majesty's service for ever. I will mention to you some of our laws. No officer to leave the without leave of the Captain of the Forecastle ; and the committee to consent to no woman to go on shore, but as many may come on board as choose ; and to cheer every night and morning. We had a *gulling* ready for any officer refusing our orders, and a furnace, which alarmed them. We punished twenty-two men and one woman in our ship ; the men for getting drunk with our small beer, were hauled up to yard-arm and ducked three or four times, letting them fall about seventy feet. A lieutenant made the above whore drunk ; he was sent ashore and dismissed, and she ducked.

We sent a petition to Lord S. and the Lords of the Admiralty—if they did not comply with our terms on Saturday, we would batter down the fort, burn the dock yard, and knock down the towns of Portsmouth and Gosport : this news brought them down, and Lord S. agreed some of our terms, and fet off for London, but we would not agree to go to sea without granting us as follows, half the ship's company to go on shore on liberty, when in harbour ; no flour to be served out when in harbour without fresh meat;— Prize-money to be regularly shared from an Admiral to an officer's boy, and to have sixteen ounces to the lb. meat, bread, flour, cheese, and beer measure. Our wine, rum, and all of better quality, and this fleet never to be parted or drafted. Our provisions and liquors are now half as much more as before, being then only 9 ounces to the lb. we further demand, that Greenwich pensioners be 10l. instead of 7l. per annum, and thas as soon as any man is wounded, to commence pay ;*and every line-of-battle ship to have a ministr*, and no man to be beat with a cane or rope, but with a cat-o'-nine-tails unknotted, and not to have more than two dozen at a time , and until all this is granted, and an act of Parliament and his Majesty's most gracious pardon, we will not lift anchor. On Sunday, the King's messenger arrived with his Majesty's gracious pardon, and that the Lords of the Admiralty and Privy Council had agreed to all for. `[The honest tar must mean, that the PRINCIPAL of their demands were granted, not ALL of them.]` We immediately hoisted our bloody flag, and he thought we were going to hang him, he begged for mercy ; he was told we were not going to hurt him, but honor him. He saw every ship, &c. cheer him three times, with the yard rigging mast-head, &c. manned in sight of thousands shore. The whole country and houses were covered to see us, not knowing what we were going at ; this done, we hauled down the flags, and gave the keys to the captain ; resigned the command of the ship, after being in our possession eight days ; —not one man killed, nor one bone broke, out of twenty-two thousand men. During all our cheering, *the Lord was on our side*. We are all happy now, and more united ever, and our officers praise us for our good conduct and spirit. The whole fleet is now at St. Helens, and we expect to sail the first fair wind. There were 10,000 soldiers sent to Portsmouth to frighten us, but we were not such fools. The marine would have fought all the soldiers the kingdom ; we were prepared for them, and all our guns double shotted, and small arms ready ; we kept three watches night and day, and kept a good look-out. Every thing was carried on in as private a manner as possible. As our laws and regulations were very severe, it has been represented we are all in mutiny ; no such thing ; there was not a store-room in the fleet broke open, nor no ill treatment to any person whatever. The soldiers on shore laid down their arms. They declared we were doing what was right.

---
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000230/17970527/017/0004

Hampshire Chronicle - Saturday 27 May 1797

TO DO

HOME NEWS. PORTSMOUTH. The mutiny among the seamen at Sheerness and the Nore has got to such a height as demands more vigorous measures than have yet been used. There has been enough concession, and tlte refractory seamen must be brought back to their duty by other than lenient and and palliative measures. The men board the Inflexible, of 64 pins, lyinging in Sheerness harbour determined to carry the ship to the Nore. The captain of the forecastle took the command, and they carried the ship out. In passing the St. commanded by Sir H. B. Neale, they fired a shot into her, because her men did not cheer them as they passed. Sir H. B. Neale-} to prevent more disagreeable and fatal consequences, desired his men to get upon the Shrouds and cheer. They did so in obedience to their captain, and perhaps some bloodshed was spared in consequence of the judicious conduct of this excellent officer. The seamen the Nore and the Downs have proceeded to acts of mutiny and violence which were not thought of in Lord Bridport's fleet. Almost all the officers of Stag frigate, are turned a Shore by the crew. They requested Capt Yorke to remain on board, but he thought proper to (bare the fate of his officers. Several other ships continue unfatufted, principally wit!i different officers j and several have been senr??? shore by the seamen, and not permitted to return to their ships. The seamen have not been guilty any personal disrespect to their officers on board ; they regularly perform the duties of the ; but it is greatly to lamented that even indifferent matters they do not fliew that obedience which they formerly used to do. One Heather, the Mars, who had afiumed the title of Judge Advocate of the Fleet, has been tried for conspiracy, and correspondence with perfons Portsmouth. having been discovered the fleet that an improper correspondence had been carried on, the boats of the Royal George and Queen Charlotte were appointed to keep a look-out on nights, if possible, to prevent it, and detect the author or authors; on the second night's watch, about twelve o'clock, they boarded a boat rowing from the Mars to the Duke, in which they discovered papers that were produced evidence, and proved the means of convctiug Heather, who was, in sentenced to hanged.— was afterwards at the request of his own Ship's company, reprieved; but ordered to receive two dozen lashes, which were inflicted. The following officers, understand, have resigned their commands in the Channel fleet: Captain Holloway, ofthe Duke; Captain Griffiths, of the London; Captain Nichols, of the Marlborough ; Captain Eaton, of the MeduSa; Captain Cook, of La Nymphe; Captain Miller, of Megaera ; Captain Barker, of the Incendiary ; and Captain Mowbray, of the Fly. The principle upon which they have fent in their resignation is, that they arc unwilling to run the riSk of experiencing a repetition of the insults lately offered to them. One of the lieutenants of the Repulse man of war has been promoted, at the recommendation of Admiral Duncan, for his spirited behaviour in resisting, with success, the late mutinous conduct of the crew of that fhip at Yarmouth-' Tuefday, twenty«vx the laSt entered artificers were discharged from the dock-yard, without any previous notice whatever. This hidden order was occasioned through the appearance of discontent among the people reflecting the price of their labour. Lord Hugh Seymour, rear-admiral of the white, arrived the Sans Pareille, with the Triumph and Bedford line-of-battle ships, and le Revolutionnaire frigate, with a convoy from Plymouth. The Lords of the Admiralty have appointed Captain Honeyman, M. P. to the command of the TiSiphone floop of war on the North-Sea Station. Arrived the Hornet floop from a cruize. Monday, La JuSte, of 84, and Hector, of 74 guns, came into harbour from Spithead. Same day, the of 36 guns, failed out of harbour to Spithead. Also sailed the Plover floop, with a convoy for the Downs. The 88th regiment of foot embarked on board tranfports bound to Guernsey. A curious mutiny broke out a few days since on a taylor's Shop-board, in Oy er street. The journeymen, fourteen in 1 number, chafe two Delegates, feized on the Shears, goofe, and fleeveboards; but on Mr. Laing, the proprietor, being informed that the mutineers had got pofTeflion ofthe arms, he instantly complied with their demand, an increafe of wages ; and fubordination was happily restored without bloodshed. Plymouth, May 23. Notwithstanding that this is the third day that the Channel fleet has been off this port, endeavouring get down Channel, which circumstance alone, to every rational mind, is the surest indication of the crews of thofe ships being Satisfied with the mam: in which government have complied with their demands, yet the sailors at this port contin in the same mutinous state, cheering in the n ing and evening, and keeping the command of the mips. What will fatisfv them, or when the bufinefs is to end, God only knows A number of sailors were ducked yesterday, for disobedience of orders. Five o'clock, P. M. are happy to say, that this moment Sir J. B. Warren has again refumed the; command of his in Cawfand Bay: as foon as he came alon ;fide, the sailors manned the Shrouds, and gave him three cheers, and on his getting on board, his broad pendant was hoisted at the main top-gallant-malt head, and the Pomone's colours fllifted from blue to red; the Artoie, Galatea, ad Sylph, inftantly Shifted colours', and th< fame time gave three cheers, fo that we have reafon to hope that perfect order is once mon reftored on board this fquadron. That the fame may be adopted by every fhip in this harbour, is the earnest wish of every one who has the safety the country at heart. Sheerness, May aj. The mutiny, which has long prevailed this port, has not yet fubSided. The sailors are determined not to return to their duty until he arrival of the Lords of the Admiralty. A Urge bunch of blue and pink ribbands is univerfa ly worn by them their motto is, «« Sticccfs to the Delegates of the Fleet/ Two regiments of militia arrived here last night, which the Such degree, that they inftant /.Seized upon the whole the gun-boats, and every to proceed to the most violent extremities.-—- They afterwards took them from the harbour to the Nore; and this morning they Struck the flag Adm. Buckner, jn board the Sandwich, and hoisted a red one in its Stead, which was immediately answered all Ships at the Nore and in the harbour, except the Mary yacht. The Delagates informed the crew of this veflet that they did not with th m to join in their combination, but infilled their giving them three cheers whenever they >uld pafs one another. As there has appearec in our last an account of the death of Mr. SatT'ry, surgeon and agent for the sick and hurt at this place, which it was erroneously Slated that Seamen went to his house for; purpose of hanging him, and that in a fit of fpair he cut his throat: in justice to the Seamen, we now State, that never went to his house, which is in the fon, for any purpose whatever ; and that their hearing of his having cut his throat, they expressed great sorrow, declaring, that if they disapproved of any thini; the business the tick quarters, they intended him no harm.

---
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000230/17970513/011/0004
Hampshire Chronicle - Saturday 13 May 1797

HOME NEWS.

PORTSMOUTH.

In consequence of information having been received at the Admiralty, that the Brest fleet, consisting of 18 ships of the line, with a great number of transports having troops on-board, was anchored in the outer roads of Brest, orders were sent to Lord Bridport to put to sea immediately, and his instructions to that effect reached him on Sunday morning. His lordship made the Signal for weighing and putting to sea; but not a crew would act. It seems they had read the late conversation in the House of Lords, in which silence on the subject of the seamen's complaints was so strongly recommended by the ministers and their friends, and they suspected there was a design of deceiving them ; they thought ministers had no serious intention of having their demands sanctioned by the parliament. This was the reason they all refused to weigh anchor on Sunday morning ; and now, finding themselves, by the call made upon them to put to sea, forced to a decisive line of conduct, they resolved to hold a convention of delegates on-board the London, lying at Spithead. For this purpose, the delegates from the different ships at St. Helen's and at Spithead took to their boats, and proceeded to the London but, when they came along-side, Admiral Colpoys whose flag was flying on-board the London cautioned them against acting as they formerly had done. He told them they had asked a great deal and obtained much, and he would not suffer them to proceed to demand more. He said they ought to be contented, and if they offered meet in convention, he would order the marines to fire on them. The admiral had taken particular pains to gain the marines to his interest, in wliich he had been ably assisted by Lieutenant Sims, of that corps. The delegates however persisted: the admiral ordered the marines to level their pieces at the delegates; they did so, and in this situation the admiral again admonished the delegates, but to no purpose. A scuffle took place, the marines were ordered to fire, when William Baker, Richard Collins, John Pickering, and Charles Darrom were wounded; the three former died of their wounds on Monday in Haslar Hospital. The seamen fired on the officers, when Lieutenant Sims and another officer were wounded, and sent to the hospital. Mr. Sims has undergone amputation; the seamen on Tuesday sent an order to have the removed from Haslar Hospital, or they would come and hang him ; they at the same time gave orders for their shipmates not to be buried, as they would perform that office themsleves. When intelligence was brought of the death of the men at Haslar, the whole crew of the London declared open hostility to the officers of the ship, they turned the guns in the fore part of the ship towards the stern, and threatened to blow all aft into the water unless they surrendered. Admiral Colpoys was now confined in one cabin, and Captain Griffiths, his captain, in another. The greatest irritation now pervaded every ship throughout the fleet, the seamen declaring they would have blood for blood, and that the admiral should be hoisted to the yard-arm. Orders were accordingly issued by the Seamen for every ship in Portsmouth harbour and at Spithead to repair next day (Tuesday) to St. Helen's, when two men were deputed from each ship to try the admiral. This trial, if it may be so called, took place on Wednesday, no officer was present, the tribunal was composed entirely of the seamen, and the following sent us as the verdict : " That in every part of his late conduct on board the London man of war, he conducted himfelf as became a British  officer ; he is therefore to resume the command of this ship or decline it, as he thinks proper." Many of the officers were turned on shore on Monday and Tuesday ; the boats' crews that conducted them were each armed with a brace of piltols and a cutlass.

Monday, after receiving the above melancholy intelligence, a cabinet council was held, at which the Lord Chancellor and all the ministers were present, and it was resolved to send the ratification by the King in council of the agreement of government to the demands of the seamen. This ratification was decreed on the 3d instant in council ; and an official copy of it was sent to Portsmouth on Tuesday. Mr. Powell also left town with copies of the above papers for Sir John Orde, at Plymouth; Mr. Winehester proceeded for Torbay, where Sir Roger Curtis's squadron has returned from a cruize of Brest; and a third messenger went to our fleet at Yarmouth.

The gates of the garrison were shut on Wednesday and the bridges drawn up, soon after sun-set ; field pieces were planted in different parts, the moats were filled, and every preparation made to defend the garrison as if it was about to undergo a formal siege. The troops that can be brought into action in a few hours notice amount from nine to ten thousand, and yet do no hear but the Seamen at St. Helen's are perfectly satisfied with the augmentations granted by parliament.

Wednesday forenoon the coroner sat on the bodies of the three seamen who died in Haslar Hospital, in consequence of the wounds they received Saturday in the London, and, after a minute investigation of the circumstanets, the jury brought in their verdict, " Justifiable Homicide."

The bodies were brought from the hospital, to the Common Hard in the London's launch, with the colours half staff high ; a little before four, they were carried in solemn procession from the Hard to Kingston church-yard, where they were decently interred in the evening. Two colours preceded the first coffin, half staff high, and one each of the others ; about fifty of their shipmates, and nearly as many women in black, walked two and two, and each of the coffins was attended by six women white. The whole was conducted in the most orderly manner, and the concourse of people to view the procession pass through Portsea, Halfway-houses, &c. was immense.

With infinite satisfaction we announce that the disagreeable disputes in the fleet may now be considered as terminated. All the crews except one, had returned to their duty on Thursday night ; and there cannot be a doubt but that particular crew will speedily follow the good example set them by their brother tars in the rest of the fleet. Their requests having been all granted by an act of the legislature. We are happy in being enabled to state, that the crew of the London behaved with the utmost respect to Admiral Colpoys during his confinement, and repeatedly told him, that they had no intention of hurting him.

Some ill-founded reports having been circulated respecting the nature of the order of the Lords of the Admiralty, under which Vice-Admiral Colpoys acted, when overpowered by the crew of the London, we insert, for the satisfaction of the public, a correct copy of the order alluded to, by which it will appear that the construction given to the last parapraph, "of its having rendered the King's pardon, granted the seamen and marines, of no avail," could be applied to it by persons only who have a desire of farther misleading these deluded people, the order itself bearing no retrospect to any proceeding antecedent to the time it was given, but being calculated only to prevent disturbances and discontent in future.

Whereas, from the disposition lately shewn by the seamen belonging to several of his Majesty's ships, it is become highly necessary that the strictest attention should be paid by all officers in his Majesty's naval service, not only to their own conduct, but to the conduct of those who may be under their orders, the more effectually to induce a proper subordination and discipline, and to prevent, as far as may be, all discontent among the seamen, your Lordship is hereby directed to be particularly careful to enforce, so far as the same may depend you, and to give orders to the officers employed under your command to enforce, ail the regulations for the preservation discipline and good order in his Majesty's navy, which are at present established for that purpose ; and you are more especially to give the following directions, viz.

That the flag officers of the squadron under your command do frequently muster ihe crews of the ships belonging to their respective divisions ; that the captains and commanders of the ships and vessels of your squadron. never be absent themselves, nor allow any officers under their orders to be absent from on board their respective ships for twenty-four hours at any one time, without our permission, or leave obtained from yourself for that purpose.

That all flag officers, captains, and other officers, do wear their respective uniforms, not only while they are on board the ships to which they belong but also when they are on shore or near any seaport town.

That the captains and commanders of his Majesty's ship's and vessels do cause the articles of war to be read on board their respective ships to the companies thereof, at least once in very month, agreeably to their instructions; that they also see that the arms and ammunition belonging to the marines be constantly kept in good order, and fit for their immediate sevice, as well in harbour as at sea; and that they are future to be very careful to rate the ships' companies according to the merits of the men, in order that those who may not be deserving thereof may not receive the pay of able but ordinary seamen.

That particular attention be paid to the regulations relating to the cutting up of fresh beef, that choice pieces be never purposely selected for the officers from that which is cut up for the company and that choice pieces of salt meat be never taken for the officers out of the tub or vessels from which it may be served to the ship's company.

That officers do not select casks of the best wine or spirits for their own use from those intended for the ship's company, nor exchange any wine or spirits of their own for that which has been sent on board for the use of the ships.

That the captains and commanders of his Majesty's ships do stricly enjoin the surgeons belonging to tneir respective ships not to take out of the ship any part of the medicines  or necessaries intended for the use of the sick, but strictly to apply them to the purposes for which they were sent on board.

That the captains and commanders of his Majesty's ships be particularly attentive to the conduct of the men under their command, and that they be ready, on the first appearance of mutiny, to use the most vigorous means to suppress it, and to bring the ringleaders to punishmnt.

Given, &c. the 1st of May, 1797.

(L. S.) At the Court of St. James's, the third of May , 1797. Prsent, the King's most Excellent Majesty in council.

Whereas there was this day read at the board a report from a committee of the Lords of most Honourable Privy Council, viz.

Your Majesty having been pleased, by your order of council of the 26th instant April, to refer unto this committee a memorial from the Right Hon. the Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty in the words following, viz.

"May it please your Majesty,

"Having taken into our consideration the situation of the petty officers, seamen, landmen, and marines, serving on board his Majesty's ships, in respect to the wages, and proportion of provisions, allowed to them when serving on board your Majesty's said ships: and having consulted some of the most intelligent officers in your Majesty's naval service, upon these points, we find they agree in opinion with us, that the great increase in the price of every article of life since the present rate of wages was established, it may be for the advantage of your Majesty's service, and an encouragement to seamen to enter on board your Majesty's ships, that their situation be made more comfortable by some increase to their present allowance of wages and provisions ; we do most humbly propose to your Majesty, that an addition be made to the wages of the several petty officers, able seamen, ordinary seamen, landmen, and marines, and to the allowances of provisions to them, the officers and others, serving in your Majesty's fleet, according to the plan, and subjct to the regulations hereafter mentioned,, viz.

" That an addition of 5s. 6d. per month, be made to the present wages of the petty officers and able seamen belonging to your Majesty's fleet.

" That an addition of 4s. 6d. per month, be made tp the wages of ordinary seamen.

" That an addition 3s. 6d. per month, be made to the wages of landmen.

" That the allowances, usually called consolidated allowances, made to marines when serving on shore, viz. to serjeants, corporals, and drummers, at the rate of 2d. and to privates, at the rate 2 1/4d. per diem, be continued to be made to them when embarked and serving on board your Majesty's ships.

" That all petty officers, able seamen, ordinary seamen, landmen, and marines, who may hereafter be wounded in action with the enemy, do receive the full amount of their wages until their wounds be healed, or until, being declared incurable, they shall receive a pension from the chest at Chatham, or be admitted into the Royal Hospital at Greenwich.

" That a practice which has hitherto prevailed, of deducting one eighth part of certain articles of an provision as an indemnification for leakage or waste, be discontinued, and that the full allowance of provisions be issued to the crews of your Majesty's said ships, without any deductions whatsoever, on account of the leakage or waste; and that until such time as this regulation can be carried into effect, short-allowance money be paid the crews of such ships in lieu thereof.

" And lastly, That these regulations should take place and be in force from the 24th of this month.

"Which is nevertheless most humbly submitted.

ADMIRALTY-OFFICE  
APRIL 27th, 1797.
SPENCER, P. STEPHENS. L.GAMBIER. R. YOUNG."

The Lords of the Committee, in obedience to your Majesty's said order of reference, have thus taken the said memorial into consideration, and do humbly agree to report, as their opinion, to your Majesty, that they concur in opinion with the said Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty, and recommend to your Majesty to order that the Commissioners for executing the office of lord high admiral of Great Britain, &c., do give dircections to the principal Officers and Commissioners of the Navy, for preparing an estimate of the charge for carrying into execution what is proposed in the said memorial, and that such estimate should be laid before your Majesty in council.

His Majesty having taken the said report into consideration, was pleased with the advice of the Privy Council to approve thereof, and to order, and it is hereby ordered, that the Commissioners for executing the office of lord high admiral Great Britain, &c. do give direcions to the principal Officers and Commissioners of the Navy, for preparing an estimate of the charge of carrying into execution what is proposed in the said memorial, and present the same to his Majesty at this board.

W. Fawkener.

This week the following singular circumstance happened on board his Majesty's ship in this harbour: the armourer and a man on board having a dispute, blows ensued, and, while fighting both fell over the ship's side into the tide, and, though every assistance was instantly rendered to them, we are sorry to say, the armourer was drowned.

---
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000235/17970512/011/0004
Kentish Gazette - Friday 12 May 1797

TO DO

FRIDAY, May 12. O N N. of the trarifinilfion of the A& of Parliament, pall on Tucfday, the Sailors, we not yet learned; and indeed many of the accounts that arrived ycllerday morning are fomewhat contradictory.—Some of them reprelenc the Tailor- perfeClly fatiified, and that every thing is fettled while the writers others date, that the informalion which they have been able to collcdt at Portfmoutfa, docs not lead them fuppofe that deftra* ble an event hafe yet happened. The Sailors died of their wounds were buried Wednefday proceffion. Ij EXTRACp.OF A LETTER FROM PORTSMOUTH. The fittisfadory account of the Mutiny which has’ beengenerallyatuKHmccd* lament to (late, was piematdre Adm. Colpoys remains a clofe priioner itill, and The town in much conllernation. All the gates were on 'Ehur.day ; the garrifon has been under arms, on account the Military burial of Seamen killed on board die London, on Sunday. The landing was made at the-Common Hard, in much order j-and the funeral moved to Kinglton church, where the bodies were interred, and a Monument is to be eroded, by the Tailors to their memory. Several officer^ were difeharged from the Defence and fome other (trips. Every moment Teems big \vtt,h event, and is productive iome new tale or other; fo that it is Tcarcely poflible to colled a (latenient fads to be depended on. Every boat from the fleet creates hope of good news, but makes the mind more gloomy. Three-quarters paj} Sewn, P. M. Every thing is fettled in the Fleet, and every (hip perfed order and diTcipline, except in two (hips. This you may depend on. Courier. extract of another letter. We have pleafare, not only in confirming the flatement which has been made that difeon-. tents on board the Fleet were nearly fubdued,- but we with the utmoll fatisfadion announce to the Public, that Meffenger arrived at the Admiralty, this morning at fix o'clock, with account that Ihe Mu. tiny at Portfmouth is a: length happily at an end..— Sun. The Second Mutiny at PortTmouth, has, are aflured, for the prefent—We repeat fop prefem : as, after the imprudent, not to fay ungratei fuT, behaviour of the Tailors, can have very little affurance how long they will continue in the performance of their duty. The only excuTe which we can make for them is, that they have beeu milled by feme fadious and turbulent Spirits; who, to gratify -heir own ambition and infamous lull of power, care not if they involvethe Nation univdfal ruin. Two of the Naval Delegates, Evans and Joyce, were, itfeems, the joint movers of the late Mutiny; the former was a Attorney, ft ruck off the rolls for various mal-pradices amongft bis. Waftping Client?; the Fatter, a Toiacconijl of Belfaft, in Ireland, (hipped on board a Tender, with many others, by the order Lord Carhampton, for his feditious harangues. * . : The Order of Council, of the 26th of April, 1797, was on Tncfday tranfmitred on board the Fleet, together with the Votes of the Houle of Commons upon the fame Tubjed. We find that the report of Sir John Jervis having taken five Regiftcr Ships, arofc from an account brought to the Admiralty by Capt. King, Lieutenant- Gpyernor of Norfolk Jfland, of two Manilla Ships having being captured Admiral Pringle’s Tquadron, Two coaches arrived on Tuefday morning at the Rank, laden with bullion from Yarmouth. ull week was married, by fpecial licenfe, at his houfe in Grofvenor fquare, the Rt. Hon. Earl Derby, to MiCs Farren, of Greeo-ftreet, Grofvcnor- Ti. uare Burke is verging fad towards dHTolutton ; almoft a from the indigellive of hrt (tomach, which fuffers rio food remain •f it long enough for the purposes of nutrition. morning arrived the Hamburgh Mail due on Sunday laft, and lilcewife that which came in courfe on Wednefdav. ' The accounts by the laft from Vienna, are of the date of the z6th ultimo. v • appears certain by various and concurring accounts. ■' theiMeufe is be the iBo- , ~ _ ,ry France, and that the Integrity of the German Empire is be prefcrved. The Dutchy of Luxemburg, and the Province of Limburg, are to be xetained bv- the Emperor." The part of the Biftiopric Liege beyond the Meule, to be'ced'ed, bat the Prince Bilhop b to recefve in return" Stable and, Maimed y. " The S/a/us quo ante helium is to be in all the Temporal and Spiritual States in Germany. Thu Conditution of the Empire, according the Treaty VVeftphaU.a,.is to be guaranteed byjFrance. The Rhine, from the Scheldt, are to be opened to both Ndtions. '• i- n' • . ' ' Preparations Vienna Tor the deceptions of Gencrals-Buonaparte and-Clarke. HOUSE OF COMMONS— IVednefJny, May 10. .. . MUTINY AT PORTSMOUTH. Mr. that Ik; fhouW hot take much of the. time the Hou ey a& he would have trouble them but very (liortly in lla'ing the ground* his Nforiort, and called ttpoo the Houle to attend to fafts and dates as appeart(!.-*-On the AprJ, the final concelTion the the Admiralty w.fff made; the aGth, that coriceUioo was referred t®. the Privy 'Conned ;• and on" the May» was made the Ordir Gduncil. How could the Mawlfer tor tin's ? Should he not corifefs his fault, and afk pardon the Houfe ?—Was poffible the Houle would ncgleft to pronounce their cenfure a man, who, ail their mifchiefi and misfortunes he had brought upon the Country, had added this .dangerous, if nut fatal, calamity i v, 1; He had that the Minifter ought to have brought down Mtlfige from die King—hut even now, to this msment, no Itad been brought. The Seamen, receiving the acqniefcence the Lords of the Adinirglty, Jlipulated that every grant fhoukf ratified by Parliament; the delay of that ratification was a prefumptive proof; that that delay produced what followed,—The Right Hon. Genthftian had, on a former attempted to fhift the blame from thechaige ot,delay, on the eientation of certain Speeches Parliament. Suppoliqg this to true, the Hon. Gentleman might have prevented that mifreprefcnfation, ,apd the efFefls which arole from it, by doing his duty firft* . He therefore moved, That the Rt. Hon. Wm. Pitt, haying delayed; lint-tilt Eftimate of the Expences occafioneil the increase the Wage* title Navy, Sic. was guil y of a neglect his duty, and deferred the Gen ft re of, this Houfe." Mr. Pitt that confidering he alone was perftmaliy implicated in motion, lie felt very confiderahlc dffHcultyln otTviing to.ihe the fiu't obfci which conceived ought make, as it was upon a matter of Form ; and yet he fruited to the cnnjoor of the Houfe, arid hoped they would not ra-’ftndeifhuid him, tliough he did conformity his duty. He deprecated the idea defiring the guilt, be whot it would, which the Houfe in its fhopid adjudge to have attached to the lianlacaoo, thyuld fsc transferred or divided! but when the Hon. Gentlepryv averred that he (Mr. Pitt/jnditidually was guilty', fpoke irrcgalaily point form b-n point the Houle could nut fail to know that, it vvbs rto. rueans his indifidually prepare etfimate of thole expences, diicQ eftimatc, or even offer eftimate Hopfe whin prepared, and truth there was p&st.of the financial of fire S ata with which, individual, lie had litile Ihare; but while fait} lo much the fo:m of the Mo« ■ tiori, would at.ilre fame time avow, that as to the fub(fance of it, if guilt was imputable, account not having urged with greater the Parliamentary fanftlon and ra ificatlon the compaA made the Lords the Admiralty with the Seamen the Fleet, general relating the welfare and lecurity of the Country,‘he laid nocxcufe, and had Hated his objeflions to the charge agaitilf birutelf, merely to point out the informality it. As to the remaining part, which applied the charge of Iris haying, by unneceffary-delay, occaliuned that renewal Alutiny, which nnuc had greater caule, or could more Oacctely regret than himtelf, begged the Houfe to recollect, that he had Hated all the materisl fafls a for 'flufajr queliftn.tiien a{ this tirrie was, at the day by the Hon. Gentleman to have been the proper time lor bringing it .forward, there were fuel) obvious grounds for concluding that a few days occupied in die regular the bulrnefs, would be a delay, likely produce fulpicion the Fleet of the infincciity of Mini(itrs, as* that Executive Government mull necdTarjly have been firmly opinion, that not ttr hurry it • tire Houfe won 1 bedangerous, and drat was criminal-in , him, as Minilter lo attend to it ? Tins was | ht and meaning of the Motion, it meant any Hop. Gomleman would fee then how fafts his and thp Houle would decide upon tjrera.—Op of Api.ii the accounts ived that the Scanr£;n pf tire fleet, after their firlf demands, had reiurncd their duty—mi the a6dr their Memorial was piefeiitod the Lords of the AdtDti airy the Council, and_ thernj rcfpued a Committee ; and the report of that.pprnUk-c.'vas approved, the next day, the next day but one, onwhich, .accoiding to cultomary forms, the Council met, auct this was the 3d ; day of May:—On the very next day, notice was given to tire Houle the Eilimate; —it was jaccordingly given in upon Friday, and voted upon Monday. Thus it would appear the Houle, that at time of the approbation of the Privy Council at the tigoe of jiis.giving.notice to the Uouf&of the Ellimate. —at the lime giving the Elliurate —at the time propc/mg the KefpLotions which w*}e v.otpd by the Conrinitterr.of Supply upon lire Ertimate—and,stall times, and every itage throughodt the luifines, Mimlferf; had given the mol{, unequivocal and ur.queftionalde evidence a continual, uuitorm intention, tq bring forward llie nreafurc in due fbrnr, tor purpol'e obtaining for it par liamentary and ratification. , , to the Quell ion of Sincerlfy, he bad not..yet heard, doubt llarteil tefpefling the intentions Government carry into full efftiSl the mealme in qudlu.n. Could any man then, knowing’, tvvry man mult, it the fiocere intention pf Mmifters fo, emertaitr a doubt that if they thought the ieall danger was likely to attend delay, they would have been fo grofsly foolifh ncglcbl giving all and dilparch pofiible, and voluntarily and caufelefsly to incur the tilk of that danger ?—That their interelt and their duty were too nearly allied to admit of focjr doubt, was point that their enemies and their friends mull alike allow. But there was one circunrftance which put the qaefiioir, as to guilt imputed Mmitlets in this refpeft, entirely out of the queltion, which was, that the concefliotv rerpefling the allowance of provifions had been piafticaHy announced to the Fleet by Lord bridport, long before the lad difeontents broke out. Under thefe circumffances, lie lelt to the candour and juftice of the Houfe to judge, whether the condufH 6f his Majefty’s Minillers, far the view tins Motion went, could at all be coltfideredas qualified with the name ofgtitlr. Befqrc concluded, li£ thought it his duty to add, that by the laft accounts which.anised from Portforouth, and which the hazineJs of the weather rcrulfied lefs perfefl than could be wrfhed, it appeared that there was difpofition in Fleet to their duty, he hoped would all. fo happily Improved, to remofe' all anxiety on the iubjeft,—He would not fay that he was yet fully pof; felfed of particulars as to (late, with confidence, what might remove aj>prelt«i)fi r ns but had at lead a dawn of hope, that fubordihation and tranquifity loon be reftorcd»'> But the judgment of the Houle on him, what might, hoped 1 e-alt ihejt would they conceived that c*d«.-> foiing him would,contribute to that event, difturb; their own prolpefts, or deprive the public of.the benefit of whatever cenfure might fall on him. • .v Sir William Geary faid, that if the Houle, Imprefled air carried away by the eloquence rthe Henotirabte Gen» , tWman who made the Motion, fliould come h.tfttiy and intertijiciately to a dcctfiosi a poin', they would afterwards it, and be.the firfr.to condemn the preci- P'-' -ncy thtir own Cundufl ——He would, theiefotc, again, and again, expicfs his-wifh, that the Morion poned, as the Mover did not fetm himfelf to have made his tvtn the manner, of* its I wording.—As the Motion originally flood,, it t>nlyiHn;>lied an omilTionon the the Miniller ; it now Hood amended, jt,cha»geJ‘the nilfer with a Cr flion. every view of the fubjiit, was Confidently perfuaded . the Hon. Gentleman fliould defer Ijis Motion. Hprt. Mr. lorke, fitid, that, however ardently f.:it wiflied, and however flrongly rndeavoured to exprtfs that that the puient Motion not on, yet as it was Jnow gone into, was n. t nor would be endeavour, Hop it,-*-Hc felt, however, .nutch, force the point of form urged.by the Right Hon. Gen 4 (Mr. Pitt}} and, in .Jiis opinion, it ought to l?e cqnlidered and liriftly adliered -to. The many Amendment* Gentlemen had been obliged ro Introduce in the Motion, plainly proved that the Hon. Mover did not clearly fee agamll what part of Adminiltration his Charges Ihcuild apply and tliefe various Amendments would the Journals as .a proof that —Neither had the Hon. Gentleman adduced any fubftantial grot rrds to evince the neccfGiy his Motion.—Does he wiflr form our judgments ti e cotiiwlciaiiori of more eve: t, without attending the infipite v<niety circumflances that may have otcurptd Jn it ? And it pclTihle the nature of ilungs, but that tit event which had recently happened, »hicit now all deploring, may not have been through fuch a variety of accidental circurjillancea ? proof is brought before the that the delay, the. imputed caule, has been the li.ie caule of that eytit;—is there in the Houle who can take upon him to fay, that thisdelayhas been ihe only uile ? Mr. fox (aid, thai every view had taken the of Mihifteri dining the laie tranfaflions, confirmed him in the of the,expediency diicct Vote Cenfure that cofiduff. Mr. Secretary the Hen. Gentleman Teemed th;rik that tftey flioold have what happened. Could they They d not .fuipeif itp the Hon. Gentlenian himlell at that time did not tt. If he did, \votild he have been guilty any,crime informing them, if had fuperior theirs. The faff was, the board the fliips thought the bufinefs concluded ; did every man and the necejfary for its completion were taken with ail d difpatch. But it Teems they alio Ihuuld have been prepared countera£l the rnalignity of the JacchTus. lie would in the of an Hon. Gentlenian,—-if men were committing Tieafon, let them come forward nnnfttlJy; they did not to find them in obTcure hqltls in the bnttoms the common, of. Seaman. But with fatisfadlion, and Teveral, cou'tl hear witncis th;,t lie frequently ilated it 'with fatisiaciion, • that during the great eft heat and ardour the 'iimult* brave men never once teemed toftuw tlie what might be called Jacobinical p 1 inciptcs. But the lame moment, when they were the wanneit in u heir Claims, they declared that they wcul l preteive.tbe Independency of our Crown, nor fliould any one dare afire jt with impunity the Fleets of Great Britain. another attempt were made to corrupt them. prefent, he was perfnadal, that they would remain firm and ui.flnken, and n, with indignation, 1 any who would dare t<? inculcate Inch principles jarcolnhiftn. No !',that was the fide on. which the ddigning dare not attack but a more infiduous coiU'Te was purfued—when the queftion Pay.and Piorifion was adjufted, which was the only queftion, ificn ihey Vgre deceived by falle ftatements—they the Kind’s Pardon was a forgery, and that their BUI was thrown but of the of Commons. It was by filch faifo llarem-nts, and unfQundeJ repreientacions, tlut they were again thro* into, ferment, .lint, as foon as they uuclej 110 that tlie had ratified the Treaty, they lliewed immediate fynaptoms or retyraihg order and diJcipline. If, und r circumftantes, Kura Iters could be laid to be negligent, it was in cmmolt with every one, they thought,the diff i ences comp'etely adjulted, when tile Fle«.t failed from PortlVnopih S'. Heim’s. As oof it, the agreement had been ached upon irt tire of Provifions, where the full allowance was fervid out. Notwirhllaiiding fallen Trdm t.he Hon. Gentleman, no one could hatje hapjrened, the matter had been latified Ivy Parliament; that fame defining fpirit which, the pment calc, haddeceived one taife repi efenta iotv, might have worked in other way, and other confeqjtences enfued. Mr. ft'hithrea.l requcltcd the attuition of the. for few s.—The ground upon which Mintfter* defended them lit; s was, that they had every reafon fuppofi* that all dilhirbance was at an cad, and that therefore, there was no occafion for extraordinary expedition j but.he begged recall to the rccollefflon Gentlemen, ihat on the zgth cf April, when Lord Brtdport’s fleet to St. Helen’s, even then there were three Ships remained Spithead who would not join the Fleet; this, together with tlre'Grcumftance the Plymouth Delegates coming round to Portlmouth, ought,to Minifl rs that ail doubts were not at j.in end, and therefore IhoviH have filenced all 'fufpicions, by tatilying the Board of Admiialty.—The Houfe then divided, the Motion, 63, —Againll xjy.—Majority 174

---

Spithead/St Helens mutiny https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spithead_and_Nore_mutinies

https://www.euppublishing.com/doi/pdf/10.3366/rom.2007.13.2.133

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/BL/0000950/17970425/029/0002?browse=true
Cumberland Pacquet, and Ware's Whitehaven Advertiser - Tuesday 25 April 1797

MUTINY in the FLEET.

Discontents have lately broke out on board the fleet at Spithead, of a very serious and alarming appearance. Lord *Bridport* on Saturday made the signal for the ships under his command at Spithead to drop down to St. Helen's, but was astonished to find that the signal was not obeyed; and he then learnt, for the first time, of the mutinous spirit which had taken possession of the fleet. On Sunday it shewed itself more fully. There was a perfect understanding amongst the seamen of all the ships at Spithead; and the signal for making public their resolutions was,— those of the Queen Charlotte running up the fore-shrouds and giving three cheers at the moment when the signal was made by the Admiral to prepare for sea. The plan was concerted and arranged with the utmost secrecv.— Each ship deputed two men to manage and direct the business ; and the crews rove a rope through a block on the starboard yard-arm of each ship, for the puprose of hanging any man who did not support the cause, or who should betray it, and also for the purpose of keeping strict discipline.— Lord *Bridport* made on Sunday a communication to the Admiralty of this unexpected occurrence ; and early on Monday morning Rear Admiral *Pole* arrived in town on the occasion. A Board of Admiralty was held, which was attended by Mr. *Pitt*.— In the afternoon, Earl *Spence*, Lord *Arden*, and Admral *Young*, (composing a Board) set off for Portsmouth, to make such further arrangememts as might be thought requisite upon the spot.

*Portsmouth, April 19*. The mutiny in the fleet still continues in full force; but we learn with pleasure, and from respectable authority, that the seamen's claims are in all respects complied with. —The strictest discipline, particularly with regard to sobriety, continues to be preserved throughout the fleet. One man on board *La Pompee* had this morning a severe dozen with a thief's cat, and was thrice lowered from the main yard into the water, for bringing a pint of spirits on board.

A Petition, addressed to Parliament, has been printed, which states,

"We beg leave to remind your august Assembly, that the Act of Parliament passed in the reign of King Charles II. wherein the wages of all seamen serving on board his Majesty's fleet was settled, passed at a time when the necessaries of life, and slops of every denomination, were at least 30 per cent. cheaper than at the present time ; which enabled Seamen and Marines to provide better for their families, than we can now do with one half advance.

"We therefore request your Honourable House will be so kind as to revise the Act aforementioned, and make such amendments therein, as will enable your Petitioners and their families to live in the same manner at Seamen and Marines did at that Time."

The names of the deputies (thrity-two in number) are subscribed to this petition.— There is also another petition to the Lords of the Admiralty.

[Several of the London prints of Friday say that letters from Portsmouth, of the preceding day, assert that the matter is now settled ; and that the demands of the seamen have been fully complied with:— others, that the board of admiralty has signified that the following advances shall made, to the pay of able-bodied seamen, 4s. per month;—ordinary, 3s.— landmen, 2s.—and that the pound of provisions shall contain 16 ounces, instead of 12;— with other ameliorations.]

It is but common justice to say, that the seamen have conducted themselves through the whole business with a sobriety, steadiness, unanimity, and determined resolution, that would do honour to any other cause.

---



---
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000073/17970429/019/0004
Oxford Journal - Saturday 29 April 1797

LONDON, April 25.

A Cabinet Council was held at Lord Grenville's Office, Downing-street, on Saturday, at which the Lord Chancellor, Mr. Pitt, Duke of Portland, Earl Spencer, Lord Grenville, Mr. Dundas, &c. were present, which sat upwards of three hours, on account of the Convention on board the fleet at Spithead. After the deliberations of the Cabinet Council were over, Earl Spencer, accompanied by the Lord Chancellor, left town for Windsor, at which place the rest of the Cabinet Ministers met the King. A Privy Council was immediately held, when an Order of Council was passed under his Majelty's sign manual, and the Great Seal of England affixed, granting an indemnification to the Delegates who signed the Sailors' Petition, and an assurance that their demands would be recommended to the two Houses of Parliament by a Royal Message. As soon as the Meeting broke up, Mr. Powell, the Messcnger, left Windsor, with dispatches containing the pleasing intelligence to Lord Bridport at Portsmouth.

PORTSMOUTH, APRIL 23.

The dispatches which were brought down by Mr. Powell, in the extraordinary short period of seven hours, were instantly carried to the Port Admiral, who sent for Lord Bridport, Admirals Gardner, Pole, and Colpoys, and after consulting together, they proceeded on board the *Royal George*, where Lord Bridport's flag was hoisted. A signal was immediately made for all Captains, who having gone on board the Admiral's ship, the nature of the dispatches was divulged. — Every Captain then returned to his own ship, and communicated to the crews, the content of the dispatches from Windsor. The seamen unanimously declared they could give no answer till the proposals were submitted to the Court of Delegates. On assembling the Court, it was found that Joyce and Glynn, two of the Delegates, were on shore. The Court would not proceed without them.

A boat was sent on shore, and they were brought on board in as much form as if they had been two officers. The Court of Delegates being compleated, proceeded to business. The proposals were discussed, and finally agreed upon at half past six. The signal of approbation being three cheers, was first given by the *Queen Charlotte*, and then went through the whole fleet, every ship giving in this manner its consent.

The intelligence was received with the most excessive joy by the people on shore.

Dispatches are just made up for the Admiralty, and are now (eight o'clock) sending off by Mr. Powell, the Messenger, with the happy news.

*By the Commissioners for executing the office of Lord High Admiral of Great Britain and Ireland, &c.*

Having taken into our consideration a paper containing several representations from the seamen of His Majesty's ships at Spithead, respecting an advance of their wages, and being desirous of granting them every rerquest that can with any degree of reason be complied with, we have resolved to recommend it to his Majesty that an addition of Five Shillings and Sixpence per Month be made to the wages of Petty Officers and Seamen belonging to his Majesty's Navy, which will make the wages of Able Seamen One Shilling per day, clear of all deductions ; an addition of Four Shillings and Sixpence per month to the wages of Ordinary Seamen ; and an addition of Three Shillings and Sixpence to the wages of Landmen ; and that none of the allowance made to the Marines when on shore shall be stopped, on their being embarked on board any of his Majesty's ships. We have also resolved, that all Seamen, Marines, and others, serving in his Majesty's ships, shall have the full allowance of provisions, without any deductions for leakage or waste ; and that until proper steps can be taken for carrying this into effect, short allowance money shall be paid to the men in lieu of the deduction heretofore made ; and that all men wounded in action shall receive their full pay until their wounds shall be healed, or until being declared incurable they shall receive a pension from the Chest at Chatham, or shall be admitted into the Royal Hospital at Greenwich. And your Lordship is hereby required and directed to communicate this our determination to the Captain of each of his Majesty's ships under your orders^ directing him to make it known to the ship's company under his command, and to inform them that, should they be insensible to the very liberal offers now made to them, and persist in their present disobedience, they must no longer expect to enjoy those benefits to which by their former good-conduct, they were entitled ; that in such a case all the men now on board the fleet at Spithead shall be incapable of receiving any smart-money or pensions from the chest of Chatham, or of being admitted at any time into the Royal Hospital at Greenwich; and that they must be answerable for the dreadful consequences which will necessarily attend their continuing to transgress the rules of the service, in open violation of the laws of their country.

On the other hand, he is to inform them, that we promise the most perfect forgiveness of all that has passed on this occasion, to every ship's company, who, within one hour after the communication to them of the above-mentioned resolutions, shall return to their duty in every particular, and shall cease to hold further intercourse with any men who continue in a state of disobedience and mutiny.

Given under our hands, af Portsmouth, the 20th of April, 1797.  
SPENCER. ARDEN. W. YOUNG,

To the Right Hon. Lord Bridport, K. B. Admiral of the White, Commander in Chief of a squadron of his Majesty's ships to be employed in the Channel, Soundings, &c. By the command of their Lordships, (Signed) W. Marsden.

*To tbe Right Hons the Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty.*

We, the Seamen and Marines in and belonging to his Majesty's fleet now lying at Spithead, have received with the utmost satisfaction, and with hearts full of gratitude, the bountiful Augmentation of Pay and Provisions which your Lordships have been pleased to signify shall take place in future in his Majesty's Royal Navy by your order, which has been read to us this morning, by the command of Admiral Lord Bridport.

Your Lordships having thus generously taken the prayer of our several petitions into your serious consideration, you have given satisfaction to every loyal and well disposed Seaman and Marine belonging to his Majesty's fleets; and from the assurance which your Lordships have given us respecting such other grievances as we thought, right to lay before you, we are thoroughly convinced, should any real grievance or other cause of complaint arise in future, and the same be laid before your Lordships in a regular manner, we are perfectly satisfied that your Lordships will pay every attention to a number of brave men, who have and ever will be true and faithful to their King and Country.

But we beg leave to remind your Lordships, that it is a firm resolution, that until the flour in port be removed, the vegetables and petitions augmented, the grievances of private ships be redressed, an Act passed, and his Majefty's gracious pardon for the fleet now lying at Spithead be granted, that the fleet will not lift an anchor; and this is the total and final answer.

BY THE KING.

A PROCLAMATION

For pardoning such Seamen and Marines of the squadron of his Majesty's fleet stationed at Spithead, as have been guilty of any act of Mutiny or Disobedience of Orders, or any Breach or Neglect of Duty, and who shall, upon Notification of such Proclamation on board their respective ships, return to the regular and ordinary Discharge of their Duty.  
George R.

Upon the report of the Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty, of the proceedings of the Seamen and Marines of the sqsuadron of our fleet stationed at Spithead, and of the measures taken by the said Lords Commissioners in consequence thereof; and in order to manifeft our desire to give due encouragement to all those who shall return to the regular and ordinary discharge of their duty, according to the rules and practice of the Navy; we have thought fit, by the advice of our Privy Council, to issue this our Royal Proclamation, and do herehy promise our most gracious pardon to all Seamen and Marines serving on board the said squadron, who shall, upon notification hereof on board their respective ships, return to their regular and ordinary discharge of their duty : And we do hereby declare, that all such Seamen and Marines, so returning to their duty, shall be discharged and released from all Prosecutions, Imprisonments, and Penalties, incurred by reason of any act of Mutiny or Disobedience of Orders, or any Breach or Neglect of Duty, previously committed by them, or any of them.

Given at our Court at Windsor, the Twenty-second day of April, One Thousand Seven Hundred and Ninety-seven, and in the Thirty-seventy Year of our Reign.  
GOO SAVE THE KING.

Much fear has been expressed that the issue of the business maybe considered as a death-blow to the discipline of the Navy. We hope otherwise——nay we are confident that our brave Seamen will prove, by their conduct, that the professions of attachment to their country, which were held out in their different memorials, were from the heart. British Seamen do not say one thing, while they mean another; and we are sure they will now be as unanimous in their attention to duty and submission to their officers, as they were firm in demanding a redress of grievances. They are not so short-sighted as many people may imagine, and the man who would attempt to sow among them the feeds of insubrdination would speedily find that they have discernment enough to see his real character, for they would consider and treat him as their enemy.

----

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001409/17970418/021/0004
Kentish Weekly Post or Canterbury Journal - Tuesday 18 April 1797

Our Portsmouth correspondent has transmitted to us a very alarming account of a mutiny board every ship at Spithead. The cause of this mutiny is stated to be a demand for an encrease of wages, and it is even said, that the crews of the ships of Lord BridporPs fleet, though his Lordship is on board, and under failing orders, have refused to weigh anchor until their demands are complied with.— *Courier*.

Another paper states the acccont of tbe mutiny. But says it was happily got under.

---

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000215/17970422/012/0004
Staffordshire Advertiser - Saturday 22 April 1797

Thursday's Mail.

LONDON,

WEDNESDAY, April 19.

...

We learn from Portsmouth that Rear-Admiral Pole, who arrived there on Monday from London, carried no answer whatever to the remonstrances of the seamen of the fleet.

Yesterday, between eleven and twelve o'Clock Earl Spencer, with three other Lords of the Admiralty, arrived at Mr. Fielding's, the Fountain Inn, Portsmouth, where a Board was held, which broke up three o'Clock.

Admirals Lord Bridport, Gardner, Colpoys, and Pole, were present at the above Board, but their determination is hitherto an impenetrable secret.

The seamen, at the date our letters, seven o'Clock last night, still retained the command of the fleet. The Board of Admiralty was at that moment at dinner with Sir Peter Parker.

The mutiny is, without exception, general, insomuch so, that on Monday the sick and convalescents in Haslar Hospital displayed flags, composed of Handkerchiefs tacked together, with three cheers, which were returned by every ship of war at Spithead.
