# A Scandalous Tale

Just to the south of Godshill is Appuldurcombe house, now a shell of its former self, but in its heyday home to one of the Island's grandee families, the Worsleys.

In mid-1700s, Lord Richard Worsley was ?? and MP for ??

Sir Richard Worsley, b. 1751 (age 31 in 1782)
Seymour Fleming (his second wife; Lady Worsley) b. 1758 (age 24 in 1782)
Maurice Bissett b. 1757 (age 25 in 1782)

Lord Deerhurst  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/George_Coventry,_7th_Earl_of_Coventry) b.1758 (age 24 in 1782) [eloped in 1777]
Lord Peterbrough (? https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Charles_Henry_Mordaunt,_5th_Earl_of_Peterborough) ?b.1758 (?age 24 in 1782)
Marquis of Graham (b.1755 (age 27 in 1782)

Charles Windham [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Charles_William_Wyndham] b. 1860 (age 22 in 1782); acc. wikipedia (which does not mention Worsley affair): "Wyndham was the defendant in a notorious 'criminal conversation' (adultery) case, brought by Anthony Hodges, regarding his wife Anna Sophia Hodges née Aston.[3][4] Hodges claimed he had been long separated from his wife on suspicion of her adultery, after which point she became pregnant. During the trial, which happened in Westminster in February 1791 before Lord Kenyon, Mrs Hodges was confirmed to be pregnant and living with the defendant. However it was argued that the plaintiff had not only known about the affair, but had prostituted his wife to a Mr Bouvier, and the Prince of Wales (later George IV) as early as 1784. The jury returned a verdict in favour of the defendant." [ https://archive.org/details/bim_eighteenth-century_trial-for-adultery-betw_hodges-anthony_1791 ]

---
Museum Worsleyanum
https://archive.org/details/gri_33125009336864

https://www.southampton.ac.uk/archives/cataloguedatabases/webguidemss301.page

https://discovery.nationalarchives.gov.uk/details/r/3a30d6a6-9791-4317-8cad-5a46eabd4329

https://www.historyofparliamentonline.org/volume/1715-1754/survey/appendix-xi-worsley-list

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000189/17820221/008/0003
Derby Mercury - Thursday 21 February 1782

TRIAL between Sir RICHARD WORSLEY and Captain BISSET.

Thursday came on before the Earl of Mansfield, in the Court of Kings-Bench, a Cause upon an Action brought by Sir Richard Worsley, Bart. Comptroller of his Majesty's Household, Governor of the Isle of Wight, Verderer of the New Forest in Hampshire, Colonel of the Hampshire Militia, and one of his Majesty's most Honourable Privy Council, against Mr. Bisset, a young Gentleman of Niton, in the Isle of Wight, and a Captain in the Regiment of which Sir Richard Worsley is Colonel, for criminal Conversation with Dorothea Fleming, Wife of the said Sir Richard Worsley. The Plaintiff's Brief, after stating the common Formalities, charged Captain Bisset, with seducing the said Lady Worsley from her Attachment and Affection to her Husband, and inciting her to elope with, and commit Adultery with the said Defendant, Captain Bisset. Several Witnesses were called to prove the Lady's Elopement from the Camp at Coxheath, where she was at the Time with her Husband, Sir Richard Worsley, and her Arrival at the Royal Hotel, in Pall-Mall, the same Evening. The Servants of that House proved their taking up their Residence, and living together as Man and Wife, without Interruption, for three Weeks, at which Period Sir Richard Worsley and some Friends, having discovered their Retreat, came to the Hotel and carried the lovely Fugitive away; upon this Evidence the Plaintiff grounded his Action, and prayed for such exemplary Damages as would do Justice to the injured Husband, and effectually punish the Licentiousness of the Gallant.

The Council for the Defendant produced an Affidavit of Captain Bisset, stating that he was introduced to Lady Worsley by the Plaintiff himself, who took every Opportunity of leaving him alone at the most critical Moments, and in the most critical Situations, with the Lady in Question; that Sir Richard was always in Conversation recommending Attention to his Lady, as a very necessary Essential in his Friend, and was always particularly officious in promoting Familiarities between the Parties; that Sir Richard Worsley took the Defendant to a Bath which his Lady constantly frequented, for the purpose of indulging him with a sight of Lady Worsley while naked, in the Bath; that they waited together in a secret Place, till her Ladyship came to bathe, and after she had undressed herself and got into the Water, Captain Bisset was so situated as not to be able to see more than her Face; that Sir Richard Worsley, in order to accommodate the Defendant with a complete View, stooped down, and suffered the Defendant to get upon his Shoulders, where he sat till Lady Worsley had done bathing, Sir Richard frequently asking him, if she was not a divine Creature? That at another Time, Sir Richard Worsley invited the Defendant to his House, for the same indecent and unmanly Purpose of seeing his Wife naked; and that Sir Richard then took another Opportunity of exposing his Lady in the same disgraceful Situation. Every Tittle of this extraordinary and improbable Evidence being fully proved by collateral Facts, the Council, to acquit the Defendant of the Charge of Seduction, called Doctor Osborne, to prove his Attendance upon her Ladyship, in a certain infamous Disorder, previous to Captain Bisset's Acquaintance in the Family. Doctor Osborne expressed an Anxiety and Concern at being compelled to appear in that Court, upon so disagreeable a Business, and begged it to be understood, that he considered Secrecy as a very essential Part of the Duty of his Profession, but he came there under legal Compulsion, and at the earnest Solicitation of Lady Worsley, to inform the Court, that she had been afflicted with an obnoxious Distemper, and that she had neither received the Injury, by her own Confession, from her Husband or Captain Bisset.

Lord Deerhurst, Lord Peterborough, the Marquis of Graham, and the Hon. Mr. Wynham, were called on as Participators of the Lady's Favours, and to prove her Criminality, all of whom were very reserved in their Evidence, and modestly declined saying more than the Law absolutely required.

Lord Mansfield gave an excellent Charge to the Jury, the general Tenor of which condemned the shameful Conduct of the Parties, and left the final Decision of this extraordinary Business to the impartial Determination of the Jury, who, after a little Deliberation, gave a Verdict for Sir Richard Worsley, with one Shilling Damages!

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000230/17820225/008/0003
Hampshire Chronicle - Monday 25 February 1782

CRIM. CON. INTELLIGENCE.

Thursday afternoon the celebrated cause, between Sir Richard Worsley, Bart, plaintiff, and Captain Maurice George Blisset, of the Hampshire militia, defendant, was tried in the Court of King's Bench, before Lord Justice Mansfield and a special Jury, The plaintiff's case, opened by the Attorney-General, stated that Mr. Blisset, in violation of every law of hospitality and friendship, had seduced the wife of Sir Richard from her conjugal duties, on the 19th of November last, and now lived with her in open adultery. In proof of this he called several of Sir Richard Worsley's domestics, to prove the intimacy that subsisted between the parties; and the absence of Lady Worsley from Sir Richard's lodgings' at Lewes, till four o'clock one morning, when she and the Captain spent the evening together at another house, from whence they went afterwards to the Captain's lodgings, and thence took flight in a chaise and four for town, where arriving, the fond pair took up their abode at the Royal Hotel, Pal! Mail, for near a week, cohabiting together as man and wife. From hence Lady Worsley sent a message to Sir Richard, by Lord Deerhurst, informing him, that *"She Would never live with him any more!"*— Further evidence (in order to aggravate the damages) was called, to ascertain the ample fortune of the defendant, which was proved by his steward to be about 800l. per annum. Here the counsel for the prosecution rested the cause.

Mr. Bearcroft, as leading advocate for the defendant, said he was convinced that a verdict must be given for the plaintiff; and therefore the quantum of damages annexed to that verdict, was the only point on which he should trouble the court. He then stated, that in the present instance, as there was no seduction proved on the part of the plaintiff, nor any person of any description called in support of the character of the lady previous to this transaction, it was evident that his learned brethren knew they trod on tender ground; but this he should not leave to be inferred from their silence; but prove by the strongest evidence, that they could not call a single acquaintance of the family, who must not have given testimony of her *notorious infamy*. In this, he said, he was sorry to add, that he should likewise produce in evidence, that if Sir Richard Worsley was not an accessory to his own dishonour, he did not at least seem very anxious to prevent it; he trusted therefore, that if he made all this appear, of which he had not the smallest doubt, and that though a verdict should be given against his client as a matter of course, yet it ought to be unaccompanied by those immense damages that were the object of the present prosecution, but which the notorious character of the lady under consideration, he trusted would justly and legally defeat.

Lord Deerhurst was now called. On being asked, whether he thought the conduct of Lady Worsley such as became a lady of conjugal virtue? said, *certainly not*. His Lordship then stared some circumstances that came immediately under his own his knowledge, such as his being caught in her dressing-room, adjoining her bed chamber, by Sir Richard, at four o'clock in the morning, in the Isle of Wight; his meeting her on the read, as she went, at Kingston and Godalmin, in her way to Portsmouth alone, and sleeping in the same house. On being asked, whether in the *same bed?* his Lordship applied to the Judge, by whom he was justified in refusing to answer this question. Being interrogated whether he had not once had some extraordinary conversation with Sir Richard about her? he replied, that one morning, on Lady Worsley's passing the window, Sir Richard said to him, "There, Deehurst, she goes; many young men have tempted her in vain, I believe; but you are welcome to try whether you can succeed with her." But this, his Lordship said, be conceived to be uttered rather jocosely than otherwise.

Lord Peterborough spoke to the levity, and infidelity of Lady W.s conduct, as it appeared him; as did a Mr. Bouchier Smith. The Marquis of Graham was examined to the same points, and further pressed to declare whether he had not some *particular reason* for supposing Lady W. being ill during his excursion to the Isle of Wight, but his Lordship very modestly and sensibly avoided replying to the question.

The Hon. Charles Wyndham, in addition to what the other gallants had stated, proved, that her Ladyship had taken her wedding gold ring from her finger, and put it upon his, some little time before he went abroad.

Dr. Osborne was called upon to prove her Ladyship's indisposition: he said, that concerning himself, and not obliged to reveal a professional secret, he had written to Lady W. and desired to know whether she had any objection to his keeping the matter secret; to which he received an answer, insisting on his declaring it, which he therefore now did, in as delicate a manner as possible.

Two affidavits were also read, of a woman who keeps the Cold Bath, at Maidstone, that one day in September last, Lady W. came there to bathe, accompanied by Sir Richard and Captain Blisset; that soon after, she saw the latter looking in at the window, which he could not have reached without help; and that heard Sir Richard call out to Lady W. *"Seymour, Blisset is looking at you."* That when Lady Worsley was dressed and gone out, she found the two gentlemen; that they all departed together laughing, and seemingly in perfect good humour with each other.

Here the evidence was rested for the defendant. Lord Mansfield then up the whole, and explained it as law, that where an husband connived the incontinence of his wife, and was privy to her adultery, no action did lie. The Jury however found the fact according to proof, but reduced the damages, which the Baronet laid at *Twenty Thousand Pounds*, and gave their verdict tor only ONE SHILLING.


https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000071/17820302/020/0001
Ipswich Journal - Saturday 02 March 1782

Friday was tried before the Right Hon. Earl Mansfield, in the court of King's-Bench, a cause wherein Sir Richard Worsley, bart. was plaintiff and ———— Bissett, Esq. defendant. The Action was brought to recover damages against the defendant for *seducing* the wife of the plaintiff, and for committing the foul crime of adultery with her, thereby depriving Sir Richard of those comforts a husband is entitled to expect, and which it was *understood* he would have enjoyed, had not the defendant perpetrated the crime before mentioned.

The Attorney-general, as counsel for the plaintiff, opened the cause, stating a variety of matter for the consideration of the jury, but particularly the *ingratitude* of the defendant, who as the learned counsel observed, had *debauched* the wife of his friend, a gentleman to whose liberality and regard he owed his commission as captain in the Hants regiment of militia, and who had not only received him into his family with all the warmth of genuine friendship, but had, upon every occasion, shown him the most disinterested marks of esteem and attention.— Mr. Bearcroft as counsel for the defendant, willing to save the court unnecessary trouble, frankly acknowledged that he had no evidence to controvert the fact, but in a very able speech contended, on the part of his client, that the plaintiff was not entitled to exemplary damages, as he had not only *acquiesced* in the incontinence of his lady, but in fact *encouraged* it.

To substantiate the defence made by the learned counsel on the part of the defendant, and also to shew the profligate conduct of the lady, several of the *sprightly* men of the *ton* were examined, all of whom had at different times, as was generally credited, been *criminally* acquainted with her ladyship. The strict rules of justice necessary to be complied with on these occasions, reduced these *right honourable* gallants to a very awkward situation.

Lord Deerhurst was first called. He felt the disagreeable situation he stood in, and appealed to the learned judge for his direction how to act. Lord Mansfield told him, he was bound not only to tell the truth, but the *whole truth*. Lord Deerhurst then declared that he had been on a visit to Sir Richard Worsley's house in the Isle of Wight, and that in a conversation with Sir Richard, the plaintiff observed, that Lady Worsley had been often *tempted* by young men of fashion, but in *vain*; at the same time saying, "If you wish to try her ladyship, do it." Again, Lord Deerhurst said, that he had the *fortitude* to visit Lady Worsley's chamber about four o'clock one morning; but that, as the *mischief* would have it, Sir Richard caught him there, and immediately put the following *important* question to him—"Deerhurst, what brought you here?"—His lordship immediately answered, "My dear friend I have a strange custom of walking in my sleep."—This *joke* finished the matter, and the parties retired in great good humour. Lord Deerhurst was then asked, how long he remained at the house after this *unlucky* discovery. He said about 4 days, to the best of his recollection, and that, during the time, he had made an appointment with the lady, who met him in consequence at a village some miles from Southampton *unattended*, and where he remained with her 24 hours. On counsel asking his lordship if he had any *particular connexion* with her ladyship during that time, an *amiable* blush of *maiden* modesty dyed his countenance. The gallant youth immediately appealed to the learned judge, and begged to know if he was obliged to answer that question. Lord Mansfield said, by no means.

Lord Peterborough was next examined. His figure impressed on the minds of the jury a great probability of his being successful in the lady's *good opinion*. His lordship was reserved in his evidence, and said little more than *he had known the lady*.

The Marquis of Graham was the third evidence, in the course of which he spoke with uncommon modesty.—The fact is, he spoke very *feelingly* on the occasion, and some saucy auditors were ill-natured enough to say it was not surprising, as his Lordship had received favours from the Lady that had made a *lasting impression*.

The Hon. Mr. Windham was next sworn.—He acknowledged to have *visited* Lady Worsley. Counsel then asked him if he had not received a *ring* from her Ladyship as a present: he said he had—Was it a wedding-ring?—He could not tell that—Was it a plain ring? Yes,—her Ladyship's *ring closed* this evidence.

Another witness was brought to prove the following very extraordinary *whimsey* which entered Sir Richard's head one day at the bath at Maidstone in Kent. Lady Worsley, it seems, was bathing, during which time the plaintiff and defendant were in converse on the outside of the building. Sir Richard informed the defendant, that Lady Worsley was, beyond all doubt, the finest *proportioned* woman in Europe; and in case he wished to be convinced of the fact, he would assist the defendant in getting up to an aperture or window, thro' which he might see her, like *Diana* bathing with her *Nymphs*.—The soldier immediately mounted on Sir Richard's shoulders, and by that means had an opportunity of seeing the *amiable* fair one in a state somewhat similar to Eve before her *fall*.—The attendant, on seeing *Mars* peep through the hole, cried out in a very audible voice, "Lord, Madam, there's the Captain looking!—For shame, Sir!—Lord, Madam, what shall we do with the impudent man?"—Her Ladyship did not appear to be so agitated as Betty, but dressed herself with great composure, and then joined Sir Richard and the Captain, who were waiting for her Ladyship.

After the several witnesses had closed their evidence, the learned and upright Chief summed up the whole with the utmost precision and impartiality. The jurors then retired, and, after some consideration, brought in verdict for the plaintiff, to the damage of *One shilling — only*.

...

*London, Tuesday, Feb. 20.*

Lady Worsley's fortune on the day of marriage, as stated by her Ladyship's counsel, was upwards of 70,000l.

Though the evidence of only *five* of Lady Worsley's gallants was adduced to prove her repeated swervings from the vulgar path of hymen, no less than 28 were subpoenaed at her own command, every one of whom were fully competent to speak decisively on the pliancy of her Ladyship's disposition.


https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000204/17820302/001/0001
Leicester Journal - Saturday 02 March 1782

Yesterday was tried before the Right Hon. Earl Mansfield, a cause wherein Sir Richard Worsley, Bart. was plantiff, and -------- Bisset Esq. defendant. The action was brought to recover damages against the defendant, for *seducing* the wife of the plaintiff, and for committing the foul crime of adultery with her, thereby depriving Sir Richard of those comforts a husband is entitled to expect, and which it was *understood* he would have enjoyed, had not the defendant, *perpetrated* the crime before mentioned.

The Attorney General, as counsel for the plaintiff, opened the cause, stating a variety of matter for the consideration of the jury, but particularly the ingratitude of the defendant, who, as the learned counsel observed, had *debauched* the wife of his friend, a gentleman to whose liberality and regard, he owed his commission as Captain in the Hants regiment of Militia, and who had not only received him into his family, with all the warmth of generous friendship, but had, upon every occasion, shewn him the most disinterested marks of esteem and attention. After a very pointed and elegant exordium by Mr. Attorney General, several witnesses were called to prove Lady Worsley's elopement some time ago from Lewes, in Sussex, with the defendant; and the master of the Royal Hotel, in Pall-Mall, together with the waiter, and one of the chambermaids belonging to that house, were examined, who declared that the fugitives had arrived there in a post-chaise in the night, and that they had been several hours in bed together, previous to their departure. Mr. Bearcroft, as counsel for the defendant, willing to save the court unnecessary trouble, frankly acknowledged that he had no evidence to controvert the fact, but in a very able speech contended, on the part of his client, that the plaintiff was not entitled to exemplary damages, as he had not only *acquiesced* in the incontinence of his Lady, but in fact *encouraged* it. So extraordinary and unexpected a defence naturally drew the attention of the Court, particularly on Lord Mansfield's observing, that where the husband is proved to have been privy to the prostitution of his wife, he cannot be entitled to the verdict of his country.------To substantiate the defence made by the learned Counsel on the part of the defendant, and also to shew the profligate conduct of the Lady, several of the *sprightly* men of the *ton* were examined, all of whom had at different times, as was generally credited, been *criminally* acquainted with her Ladyship. The strict rules of justice necessary to be complied with on these occasions, reduced these *right honourable* gallants to a very awkward situation. They were supoened to declare themselves guilty of adultery, and to acknowledge they had received favours from a Lady, which as men of honour and delicacy they were bound to conceal.

*Lord Deerhurst* was first called. He felt the disagreeable situation he stood in, and appealed to the learned Judge for his direction how to act. Lord Mansfield told him, he was bound not only to tell the truth, but the *whole truth*. Lord Deerhurst then declared that he had been on a visit to Sir R. Worsley's house on the Isle of Wight, and that in a conversation with Sir Richard, the plaintiff observed, that Lady Worsley had been often tempted by young men of fashion, but in *vain*; at the same time saying----"If you like to try her Ladyship do it."----Again, Lord Deerhurst said, that he had the *fortitude* to visit Lady Worsley's chamber about 4 o'clock one morning, but that as the *mischief* would have it Sir Richard caught him there, and immediately put the *important* question to him----"*Deerhurst*, what brought you here?" His Lordship immediately answered, my dear friend, I have a strange custom of walking in my sleep---This joke finished the matter, and the parties retired in great good humour. Lord Deerhurst was then asked, how long he remained at the house after this *unluckly* discovery. He said about four days, to the best of his recollection, and that, during the time, he had made an appointment with the Lady, who met him in consequence at a village some miles from Southampton, *unattended*, and where he remained with her twenty-four hours. On counsel asking his Lordship if he had any particular connexion with her Ladyship during that time, an *amiable* blush of *maiden* modesty dyed his countenance. The gallant youth immediately appealed to the learned Judge, and begged to know if he was obliged to answer that question---Lord Mansfield said "by no means." The opinion of the audience, however, was *nem. con.* and here this witness closed his evidence.

Lord *Peterborough* was next examined; his figure impressed on the minds of the Jury a great probability of his being successful in the Lady's *good opinion*. As *Quitam* says in the farce, "Had he been seen knocking at the street door, it would have been sufficient." His Lordship, however, was reserved in his evidence, and said little more than that he had known the Lady.

The *Marquis of Graham* was the third evidence. In the course of which he spoke with uncommon modesty; we hope this truth is no libel on a man of fashion---the fact is, he spoke very feelingly on the the occasion, and some saucy auditors were ill-natured enough to say it was not surprizing, as his Lordship had received favours from the Lady that had made a lasting impression.

The Hon. Mr. *Windham* was next sworn. He acknowledged to have visited Lady Worsley. Counsel then asked him if he had not received a ring from her Ladyship as a present; he said he had---was it a wedding-ring; ---he could not tell that---was it a plain ring? yes.---Her Ladyship's ring closed this evidence.

Another witness was brought to prove the following very extraordinary whimsey which entered Sir Richard's head one day at the bath at Maidstone, in Kent. Lady Worsley, it seems, was bathing, during which time the plantiff and defendant were in converse on the out-side of the building. Sir Richard informed the defendant, that Lady Worsley was beyond all doubt the finest *proportioned* woman in Europe; and in case he wished to be convinced of the fact, he would assist the defendant in getting up to an aperture or window, thro' which he might see her, like *Diana* bathing with her *Nymphs*. The soldier immediately mounted on Sir Richard's shoulders, and by that means had an opportunity of seeing the *amiable* fair one in a state somewhat similar to Eve before her fall.----The attendant, on seeing Mars peep through the hole, cried out in a very audible voice, "Lord, Madam, there's the Captain looking!----- for shame, Sir---Lord,---Madam what shall we do with the impudent man?"--Her Ladyship did not appear to be so agitated as Betty, but dressed herself with great composure, and then joined Sir Richard and the Captain, who were waiting for her Ladyship. The parties met with infinite good humour and returned home laughing heartily at the whim.

A *Doctor* was afterwards sworn. This evidence proved, that he had attended her Ladyship in a situation too indelicate to mention in a public paper. He also declared, that immediately after he had received the supoena to appear and give evidence on the tryal then before the Court, he waited on her Ladyship, and requested she would not be displeased at his attending, as he should be obliged to tell all he knew. Upon which her Ladyship immediately answered, "Indeed Sir, you have my permission most sincerely: Nay more, I request you will make a point of attending, and declare every thing you know of me." This declaration discovered an uncommon affection for her present gallant, as it plainly meant---*criminate me, as by that means you will save my lover from the effects of a heavy verdict*. Some other evidences were brought, all of whom established one fact beyond the possibility of a doubt, viz. that the Lady was flighty before her present connexion. We are sorry to add, that the most of the auditors were highly displeased with the conduct of the plaintiff, who seemed to have lost a due sense of his own rank, and the dignity of manhood.

After the several witnesses had closed their evidence, the learned and upright Chief summed up the whole, with the utmost precision and impartiality. The Jurors then retired, and after some consideration, brought in a verdict for the plaintiff, to the damage of *One Shilling only*.




---

https://www.npg.org.uk/collections/search/portrait/mw63181/Sir-Richard-Worse-than-sly-exposing-his-wifes-bottom---o-fye

Worsley trial 1782


https://archive.org/details/bim_eighteenth-century_an-epistle-from-l-y-w-y-_worsley-seymour-dorothy_1782
An epistle from L-y W-y to S-r R-d W-y, Bart.  1782
by Worsley, Seymour Dorothy, Lady, 3rd edition

Publication date 1782


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seymour_Fleming
At common law, criminal conversation, often abbreviated as crim. con., is a tort arising from adultery. "Conversation" is an old euphemism for sexual intercourse that is obsolete except as part of this term.[1]


Wikipedia
a British politician who sat in the House of Commons between 1774 and 1801
entered the House of Commons in 1774 for the constituency of Newport.
 lost all his offices when the North administration fell in 1782. A supporter of the Lord North government, he was appointed a clerk comptroller of the board of green cloth (Second Clerk Comptroller, 1779; a position in the British Royal Household., responsible for organising royal journeys and assisting in the administration of the Royal Household) in 1777, comptroller of the king's household (1779–82), privy councillor (from 1780) and Governor of the Isle of Wight (1780–82).
 re-entered Parliament as MP for Newtown, Isle of Wight, from 1790 to 1793 (rotten borough then?))
Seymour was forced to become a professional mistress or demimondaine and live off the donations of rich men in order to survive, joining other upper-class women in a similar position in the New Female Coterie.
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Demimonde
Demimondaine became a synonym for a courtesan or a prostitute who moved in these circles—or for a woman of social standing with the power to thumb her nose at convention and throw herself into the hedonistic nightlife. A woman who made that choice would soon find her social status lost, as she became "déclassée".

??lightning 1778?? anything in Worsley history around then?


https://www.danceshistoricalmiscellany.com/sex-law-press-georgian-london/
 it's not surprising that legal cases concerning rape, sodomy, bestiality and adultery were eagerly followed and commented upon in the papers. Entrepreneurial businessmen would print cheap mass-produced pamphlets with an account of everything which had happened in a trial, although their reliability is doubtful; sometimes the note-taker in court would get bored or confused and left out bits and misreported others.
 One perennially bestselling source of sexual scandal is of course adultery. It's a theme which runs throughout Garrow's Law and indeed throughout the Georgian press. Then as now, the general public would shake their heads in outrage at the news of some extramarital affair and were only too quick to swallow whatever the media told them. In many cases no doubt the Georgian readers did hold genuine moral beliefs against adultery. Yet these stories wouldn't have sold as half as well as they did if there wasn't a keen interest in sexual scandal, hiding behind all the public prurience.

From a modern perspective we might assume that when a husband initiated adultery proceedings, it would be against his wife. That wasn't the case in Georgian England, where the injured husband would bring an action against his wife's supposed lover. The lover hadn't committed a criminal offence as such, but if found guilty of adultery ('criminal conversation' as it was euphemistically known) he would have to pay the husband compensation, the idea being that he'd damaged the other man's property (his wife). Because of this, adultery trials took place in the civil courts, particularly in the Court of the King's Bench.

[Westminster Hall, where the Court of the King's Bench oversaw criminal conversation suits]
Sir Richard Worsley (1751-1805) was a politician and antiquarian who married 17-year-old Seymour Dorothy Fleming in 1775. Although she brought the considerable sum of £70,000 into the marriage, they were badly suited and the marriage soon fell apart. Lady Worsley was rumoured to have had 27 lovers. She had a child by Maurice George Bisset, an officer of the Hampshire militia and a friend of Sir Richard's, with whom she then ran off in November 1781.

Although Sir Richard had previously acknowledged the child as his own in order to avoid scandal, after their elopement he was out for revenge, and in 1782 he brought a criminal conversation case against Bisset for £20,000. At first the case looked like a strong one. Lady Worsley's past history of adultery would tell against her, and there was fairly sound evidence to show that she had lain with Bisset. But as the trial unfolded, shocking revelations brought the prosecution into doubt.
Various witnesses described how Sir Richard didn't seem to care about Lady Worsleys' adultery and even encouraged it. The counsel for the prosecution revealed that when various ladies from their neighborhood had warned Sir Richard that he ought to keep his wife in check, he replied that 'Lady Worsley liked it, and he chose to…oblige her'. Following this, Lord Deerhurst gave evidence that Sir Richard had told him 'that many young Men had tried her…and that I had his permission to try my chance with her'.

The case was ultimately undone by the revelation that Sir Richard had actually displayed his wife naked to Bisset at the bath-house at Maidstone, shouting 'Seymour! Seymour! Bisset is looking at you'. Being convinced of the adultery, the jury found for Sir Richard, but obviously they weren't very impressed with him since they only awarded him 1 shilling in damages. The sensational trial found its way into the press, and you could buy a printed transcription for (ironically) one shilling. Sir Richard Worsley was ever after laughed at as a cuckold.

https://harewood.org/about/blog/notes/the-life-of-lady-worsley/
A beautiful and wealthy heiress, Seymour Dorothy Fleming was one of England's most eligible bachelorettes. On the 20th September 1775, at the age of 17, she married Sir Richard Worsley. Now known as Lady Worsley, Seymour brought £52,000 to the union which is the equivalent of over £6 million in today's money.

Lady Worsley was a spirited and independent young woman. She wasn't afraid to say what she thought and do what she wanted, something that at the time, was not expected of a woman. Wives were expected to do their husband's bidding and were seen as property in the same way as cattle or land.
In November 1781, Lady Worsley eloped with Captain George Bissett, a friend of her husbands, leaving her 4 month old baby behind. This act of defiance prompted Sir Richard to bring a criminal conversation case (adultery, with one of his officers) for £20,000 against Bissett. Lady Worsley made the courageous decision to support Bissett, publicly humiliating herself and her position in society.

Testimony was provided by a number of Lady Worsley's 27 lovers and her doctor, William Osborn. He testified that she had suffered from a venereal disease which she had contracted from the Marquess of Graham. This acted as evidence that Bissett had not been alone in committing adultery with Lady Worsley.

Although Sir Richard looked to have a strong case, it was undone by a final piece of evidence. Rather than suppressing their relationship, it was later proven that Sir Richard had displayed his wife naked to George Bissett at the bathhouse in Maidstone encouraging the affair. This evidence destroyed Sir Richard's suit and the jury awarded him only 1 shilling in damages.

Today, the famous Joshua Reynolds painting of Lady Worsley hangs in the Cinnamon Drawing Room of Harewood House. The portrait depicts the young Lady Worsley in the milita uniform of her husband.

[But see also, National Portrait Gallery,
'Sir Richard Worse-than-sly, exposing his wife's bottom; - o fye!'" https://www.npg.org.uk/collections/search/portrait/mw63181/Sir-Richard-Worse-than-sly-exposing-his-wifes-bottom---o-fye by James Gillray, published by William Humphrey
hand-coloured etching, published 14 March 1782]
Also [Seymour Dorothy, Lady Worsley ('A peep into Lady W!!!!!y's seraglio') https://www.npg.org.uk/collections/search/portrait/mw63186/Seymour-Dorothy-Lady-Worsley-A-peep-into-Lady-Wys-seraglio?LinkID=mp62143&role=sit&rNo=2 and 'Sir Richard Worse-than-sly, exposing his wife's bottom; - o fye!' by James Gillray, published by H. Brown
etching, published 14 March 1782 https://www.npg.org.uk/collections/search/portrait/mw63178/Sir-Richard-Worse-than-sly-exposing-his-wifes-bottom---o-fye?LinkID=mp62142&role=sit&rNo=0]

https://blog.english-heritage.org.uk/lady-worsley/
Sir Richard Worsley inherited Appuldurcombe in 1768. Four years later he met Seymour Fleming, a wealthy heiress with a reputation for being a bit of a wild child, and by 1776 they were married with a son. Unfortunately, Sir Richard was too busy with his duties defending the Isle of Wight from France, Spain and Holland, to pay much attention to his energetic wife, and she sought solace in fashionable society, hanging out with the Duchess of Devonshire and – perhaps – enjoying an affair or two. Richard Sheridan's School for Scandal (1777) is suggestive of this, insofar as Seymour was apparently the inspiration for naughty Lady Teazle in the play. Either way, pretty standard Georgian fare so far.
Our story takes a turn for the unconventional when one George Bisset arrives on the island in 1780. Worsley quickly befriended this fellow aristo of a similar age, and made him a captain of his militia. With the threat of French invasion looming large, local troops from around the country were ordered to assemble in Kent, and Worsley's militia, including Bisset and Lady Worsley, moved to the mainland. Bisset and the Worsleys moved into a large house in Maidstone, and soon George and Seymour were sharing more than just polite mealtime conversation. But here's the thing: it seems Sir Richard was rather excited by this turn of events, and sought to actively encourage it. One famous episode in particular suggests this was indeed the case.
In September 1781, George, Seymour and Sir Richard decided to pay a visit to Maidstone's segregated bathhouse. After a quick dip, the two men found a window high above the women's bathing rooms. Sir Richard then called out to his wife, 'Seymour, Seymour, Bisset is going to get up and look at you!' He lifted George onto his shoulder, and George spent a few quiet moments watching Seymour and her scandalised servant get dressed.
Shocking goings on such as these would probably have stayed secret if George and Seymour hadn't then eloped, and titillation turned to public humiliation for poor old Sir Richard. He decided to sue George for a cripplingly massive sum of money, on the grounds that his treacherous captain had 'damaged' his wife. George's defence stated that he couldn't possibly have damaged the dishonourable Lady Worsley bearing in mind widespread rumours that he was, in fact, her 28th sexual conquest, and furthermore the bathhouse incident proved Richard had in fact deliberately accelerated his own cuckolding. The judge agreed, and Sir Richard was awarded compensation of a single shilling. Details of the trial were covered in minute detail in the press, and an eager readership turned the court report into the first bestseller to emerge from the scandal. Apparently George Washington owned a copy.
A better candidate for the title of the 50 Shades of Grey of its day is the poem Lady Worsley – shunned by society and seeking refuge in progressive, permissive France – commissioned to put forward her side of the story. An Epistle from L-y W-y to S-r R-d W-y seeks to defend her motivations and actions with steamy rhyming couplets written in the first person:
… with B—-t stopt, for he could give
What from thine arms I never could receive.
From him no tiezing titillations came,
He rais'd those passions which he could well tame.
Dissolv'd in thrilling extacy we lay,
Kiss'd till the morn, then curs'd the coming day.
Oh, had you seen me on his breast relin'd.
Lips glu'd to lips, and limbs with limbs entwin'd.
With oft repeated acts of dalliance spent,
My lust quite sated, and my heart content.
As Hallie Rubenhold's Lady Worsley's Whim – a brilliant book-length account of the affair, published in 2008 – puts it, the poem 'hit precisely the right note to raise a chorus of public outrage … letters began streaming into the offices of the Morning Post and the Morning Herald … the pamphlet continued to sell by the bundle. It was available to buy "at every bookseller in London and all of the principle ones in every city and town in England". In the spring of 1782, anyone possessing the faintest grasp of literacy, from the shop clerk to the gentleman of leisure, was burying their nose between the indecent pages of Lady Worsley's Epistle.'

https://search.wellcomelibrary.org/iii/encore/record/C__Rb2358913?lang=eng

https://www.stowefamilylaw.co.uk/blog/2009/03/16/scandal-and-divorce-in-the-18th-century-by-julian-hawkhead/

https://www.h2g2.com/entry/A87788083
Outside Parliament, the trial's sex scandal of Sir Richard Worsley, the man who had cuckolding himself by encouraging his friend George Bisset to pursue his wife, caught the public imagination like no other. It was covered in immense details in the newspapers and cartoons about it were published. At the trial was a court reporter who recorded the testimonies of the trial. Within two days The Trial with the Whole of the Evidence between the Right Hon. Sir Richard Worsley, Bart. And George Maurice Bisset Esq, Defendant, for Criminal Conversation with the Plaintiff's Wife – Price, 1 shilling was published in London. This became an international best-seller, even George Washington owned a copy.

This was followed by anonymous, often mocking publications of the Worsley's lives. These included The Genuine Anecdotes and Amorous Adventures of Sir Richard Easy and Lady Wagtail and The Memoirs of Sir Finical Whimsy and His Lady. There were even erotic poems published, including The Whim!!! Or the Maidstone Bath and Variety, or Which is the Man?, about Lady Worsley's love life.
In April 1782, with the Separation from Bed and Board divorce case underway, An Epistle from Lady W-y to Sir R-d W-y was published. This erotic poem was the Fifty Shades of Grey of its day, in which her thoughts and feelings were expressed by a hired professional writer in 16 pages of scandalously sexual rhyming couplets.
Although society was outraged by its content, which attempted to justify the actions of a woman who left her husband and children, it sold outrageously well. Dr Samuel Johnson, author of the dictionary, described it with the words, it is without exception the best written poem that has made its appearance these many years. Sir Richard wrote a poem in response, The Answer of Sir R-d W-y to the Epistle of Lady W-y, however this was only sold in three bookshops in London.
Lord Worsley was buried in All Saints Church in Godshill, where in the picture-perfect church he was buried within a 30-ton sarcophagus with lion's feet. This vast monument was considered such an annoying nuisance that in 1905 it was hidden behind the church organ.
In 1774, Sir Richard had erected a 70-foot obelisk, ostensibly in honour of Sir Robert Worsley, but as a celebration of his own prestige. This was struck by lightning in 1831 and is now all-but demolished. His vineyards near Ventnor failed and his home, Appuldurcombe House, has been a roofless shell since the Second World War, although English Heritage have recently restored part of it.
Perhaps Sir Richard's longest lasting legacy was his workhouse. The Isle of Wight House of Industry became the template for other workhouses nationwide following the 1834 Poor Law Amendment Act, bringing untold pain and misery to millions until the workhouses were finally closed in 1929.


https://www.loc.gov/item/2002714564/
A bath of the moderns, Captain Bissett on the shoulders of Richard Worsley, Colonel of the Hampshire Militia, watching Lady Worsley pull up her stockings.
Created / Published
    1782 March 4. Engraving published by E. Darchery.
---

Wight past present Mudie 1840

in January 1778 the tower was shattered by lightning. The Rev. Daniel Walsh, then vicar
of Godshill, communicated at the time a very circumstantial account to Sir Richard Worsley, from which we make the following extract. "We had here, on Monday last, about nine in the morning, very severe lightning, with two of the loudest claps of thunder I ever heard. There was a sensible interval between the first flash of lightning and its thunder. The second flash of lightning, and clap of thunder, seemed to be at the same instant. My house rocked as if it were tumbling down, and at first I thought of the effects of an earthquake. I concluded that the cloud would burst, and be attended with fatal consequences. It first made its appearance against the old tower; and from thence its zig-zag, confused, and various directions, were so perplexed that they
cannot be followed by any continued description. It seems to have commenced its rage near the middle of the wall, about four feet below the dial-plate of the clock, where it
tore off large pieces of massive stone, and loosened many others, but did not penetrate quite through there; some of it must have entered by the spindle in the centre of the dial plate, as it brake the clock-case, liquified the upper part of the pendulum, disturbed the works of the clock, and broke the piece of iron that regulates the striking.

---
