pp66-

TALES AND LEGENDS OF THE ISLE OF WIGHT.

WITH THE ADVENTURES OF THE AUTHOR IN SEARCH OF THEM. BY ABRAHAM ELDER, ESQ.

ST. NICHOLAS.

"ST. NICHOLAS, Bishop of Myra in the fourth century, was a saint of great virtue, and disposed so early in life to conform to ecclesiastical rule, that when an infant at the breast he fasted on Wednesday and Friday, and sucked but once on each of those days, and that towards night. `[Ribandineira, vol. ii. p. 503.]` An Asiatic gentleman sending his two sons to Athens for education, ordered them to wait on the bishop for his benediction. On arriving at Myra with their baggage, they took up their lodging at an inn, purposing, as it was late in the day, to defer their visit till the morrow; but in the mean time the innkeeper, to secure their effects to himself, killed the young gentlemen, cut them into pieces, salted them, and intended to sell them for pickled pork. St. Nicholas, being favoured with a sight of these proceedings in a vision, went to the inn and reproached the cruel landlord for his crime, who immediately confessing it, entreated the saint to pray to Heaven for his pardon. The bishop, moved by his confession and contrition, besought forgiveness for him, and supplicated restoration of life to the children. He had scarcely finished when the pieces reunited, and the animated youths threw themselves from the brinetub at the bishop's feet. He raised them up, exhorted them to return thanks to God alone, gave them good advice for the future, bestowed his blessing upon them, and sent them to Athens with great joy to prosecute their studies.

"St. Nicholas was the patron of scholars and of youth, of sailors, and of the company of parish clerks of London. He was called the Child Bishop, on account of the strictness with which he fasted when an infant at the breast. Formerly, in all our cathedrals, his anniversary, the 6th of December, was thus celebrated: A boy to represent the boy bishop was elected from among the choristers. He was invested with great authority, and had the state of a diocesan bishop from the time of his election until Innocents' Day (the 28th of the same month). He was to bear the name and maintain the state of a bishop, habited with a crosier or pastoral-staff in his hand, and a mitre on his head. His fellows, the rest of the children of the choir, were to take upon them the style and office of prebendaries, and yield the bishop canonical obedience; and further, the same service as the very bishop himself, with his dean and prebendaries, had thus been used to officiate, were to have performed, the very same, mass excepted, was done by the chorister and his canons upon the eve and holiday. It further appears that this infant bishop did, to a certain limit, receive to his own use rents, capons, and other emoluments of the church. In case the little bishop died within the month, his exequies were solemnized with great pomp, and he was interred, like other bishops, with all his ornaments. There is still to be seen in the cathedral at Salisbury a monument erected to one of these boy bishops. On the stone is sculptured the figure of a child clad in the episcopal habits. It has sorely puzzled many respectable antiquaries.

"St. Nicholas was also considered to be the patron of maidens, In many convents it is said that he used to come in the night of the eve of his feast-day and fill the nuns' stockings with sugar-plums whilst they were asleep."

"Pray what is the latest date at which these boy bishops made their appearance?" asked the tutor; "for the ceremony seems very extraordinary."

"Queen Elizabeth finally put an end to it. But it is not near so extraordinary as the Feast of Fools, that was annually celebrated in the neighbouring abbey of Quarr, or Quarraria. Upon New-year's day they elected a Fool Abbot, who was dressed out in imitation of the real abbot. He was attended by his proper officers, ridiculously habited. One of the ceremonies was to shave the precentor of fools upon a stage erected before the chapel, in the presence of the people, who were amused during the operation by his loose and vulgar discourses, accompanied by actions equally reprehensible.

"They afterwards entered the chapel, and performed the service, attended by every species of buffoonery; some wearing masks representing monsters, or with their faces smutted or chalked; some personated females, and conducted themselves indecorously. During divine service they sang indecent songs in the choir, ate rich puddings upon the altar, and burnt old shoes for incense, and ran jumping all over the chapel. The Abbot of Fools performed the service habited in pontifical garments, and gave his benediction. The mass, however, was composed for the occasion, and was called the Fool's Prose.

"These abominable and impious ceremonies were probably originally instituted with a view to Christianise the *Bacchanalia* and *Saturnalia*. They were called the December Liberties." `[TH: see also eg https://github.com/psychemedia/winter-tales/blob/main/src/lord-of-misrule.md ]`

" Pray, sir, who was this King Stuff, sole monarch of the Isle of Wight, that you spoke of just now? " asked the tutor.

" Never heard of King Stuff? " said the antiquary. " Why, Mr. Elder informed me that you were a Master of Arts, and had taken first-class honours at Oxford. You must at least have read of Stuff and Witgar in the Saxon Chronicles ? "

" I never heard of the Saxon Chronicles," was the reply. " Never heard of the Saxon Chronicles ! " said the antiquary, lifting up his hands in astonishment. " Perhaps you never heard of King Alfred ? "

" I read about him at school ; but I never troubled myself about the history of England after I got to the University. A man may take every degree that Oxford confers without even having heard of William the Conqueror. But I can tell you all about Jupiter, and Mars, and Venus ; and I could give you a very correct account of the lives and the amours of the heathen gods and goddesses, all which it was absolutely necessary for me to learn ; besides which — "
