# Cowan's Bridge



## Gaskell's Biography of Charlotte Brontë

The trigger was the publication of a biography of a renowned literary figure, a certain Currer Bell, also known as Charlotte Brontë. Currer Bell's first work, *Jane Eyre*, had featured a certain school for the children of clerics, and its overly religious founder, in less than complementary terms. And Charlotte Brontë's biographer, Mrs. Gaskell, had been even more damning in her characterisation of the real world inspiration for both the school and its founder.





https://archive.org/details/lifeofcharlotteb01gask/page/52/mode/2up
The Life of Charlotte Brontë, Vol. I (1857) Elizabeth Gaskell

pp. 52-67

CHAPTER IV.

...

... [A] year or so before this time, a school had been begun in the North of England for the daughters of clergymen. The place was Cowan's Bridge, a small hamlet on the coach-road between Leeds and Kendal, and thus easy of access from Haworth, as the coach ran daily, and one of its stages was at Keighley. The yearly expense for each pupil (according to the entrance-rules given in the Report for 1842, and I believe they had not been increased since the establishment of the schools in 1823) was as follows : —

" Rule 11. The terms for clothing:, lodging; boarding, and educating, are 14l. a year ; half to be paid in advance, when the pupils are sent ; and also 1l. entrance money, for the use of books, &c. The system of education comprehend? history, geography, the use of the globes, grammar, writing and arithmetic, all kinds of needlework, and the nicer kinds of household work — such as getting up fine linen, ironing, &c. If accomplishments are required, an additional charge of SI. a year is made for music or drawing, each."

Rule 3d requests that the friends will state the line of education desired in the case of every pupil, having a prospective regard to her future prospects.

Rule 4th states the clothing and toilette articles which a girl is expected to bring with her ; and thus concludes : " The pupils all appear in the same dress. They wear plain straw cottage bonnets, in summer white frocks on Sundays, and nankeen on other days; in winter, purple stuff frocks, and purple cloth cloaks. For the sake of uniformity, therefore, they are required to bring ol. in lieu of frocks, pelisse, bonnet, tippet, and frills ; making the whole sum which each pupil brings with her to the school —

7l half-year in advance.  
1l. entrance for books.  
1l. entrance for clothes.

The 8th rule is — " All letters and parcels are inspected by the superintendent ; " but this is a very prevalent regulation in all young ladies' schools, where I think it is generally understood that the schoolmistress may exercise this privilege, although it is certainly unwise in her to insist too frequently upon it.

There is nothing at all remarkable in any of the other regulations, a copy of which was doubtless in Mr. Bronte's hands when he formed the determination to send his daughters to Cowan's Bridge School ; and he accordingly took Maria and Elizabeth thither in July, 1824.

I now come to a part of my subject which I find great difficulty in treating, because the evidence relating to it on each side is so conflicting that it seems almost impossible to arrive at the truth. Miss Bronte more than once said to me, that she should not have written what she did of Lowood in " Jane Eyre," if she had thought the place would have been so immediately identified with Cowan's Bridge, although there was not a word in her account of the institution but what was true at the time when she knew it ; she also said that she had not considered it necessary, in a work of fiction, to state every particular with the impartiality that might be required in a court of justice, nor to seek out motives, and make allowances for human feelings, as she might have done, if dispassionately analyzing the conduct of those who had the superintendence of the institution. I believe she herself would have been glad of an opportunity to correct the over-strong impression which was made upon the public mind by her vivid picture, though even she, suffer- ing her whole life long, both in heart and body, from the consequences of what happened there, might have been apt, to the last, to take her deep belief in facts for the facts themselves— her conception of truth for the absolute truth.

A wealthy clergyman, living near Kirby Lonsdale, the Reverend William Carus Wilson, was the prime mover in the establishment of this school. He was an energetic man, sparing no labour for the accomplishment of his ends, and willing to sacrifice everything but power. He saw that it was an extremely difficult task for clergymen with limited incomes to provide for the education of their children ; and he devised a scheme, by which a certain sum was raised annually in subscription, to complete the amount required to furnish a solid and sufficient English education, for which the parent's payment of 14l. a year would not have been sufficient. Indeed that made by the parents was considered to be exclusively appropriated to the expenses of lodging and boarding, and the education provided for by the subscriptions. Twelve trustees, were appointed; Mr. Wilson being not only a trustee, but the treasurer and secretary ; in fact, taking most of the business arrangements upon himself; a responsibility which appropriately fell to him, as he lived nearer the school than any one else who was interested in it. So his character for prudence and judgment was to a certain degree implicated in the success or failure of Cowan's Bridge School ; and the working of it was for many years the great object and interest of his life. But he was apparently unacquainted with the prime element in good administration — seeking out thoroughly competent persons to fill each department, and then making them responsible for, and judging them by, the result, without perpetual and injudicious interference with the details. So great was the amount of good which Mr. Wilson did, by his constant, unwearied superintendence, that I cannot help feeling sorry that, in his old age and declining health, the errors, which he certainly commit- ted, should have been brought up against him in a form which received such wonderful force from the touch of Miss Bronte's great genius. As I write, I have before me his last words on giving up the secretaryship in 1850 — he speaks of the " withdrawal, from declining health, of an eye, which, at all events, has loved to watch over the schools with an honest and anxious interest," — and again he adds, " that he resigns, therefore, with a desire to be thankful for all that God has been pleased to accomplish through his instrumentality (the infirmities and unworthinesses of which he deeply feels and deplores.)"

Cowan's Bridge is a cluster of some six or seven cottages, gathered together at both ends of a bridge, over which the high road from Leeds to Kendal crosses a little stream, called the Leek. This high road is nearly disused now ; but formerly, when the buyers from the West Riding manufacturing districts had frequent occasion to go up into the North to purchase the wool of the Westmoreland and Cumberland farmers, it was doubtless much travelled ; and perhaps the hamlet of Cowan's Bridge had a more prosperous look than it bears at present. It is prettily situated ; just where the Leck-fells swoop into the plain ; and by the course of the beck alder-trees and willows and hazel bushes grow. The current of the stream is interrupted by broken pieces of grey rock ; and the waters flow over a bed of large round white pebbles, which a flood heaves up and moves on either side out of its impetuous way till in some parts they almost form a wall. By the side of the little, shallow, sparkling, vigorous Leek, run long pasture fields, of the fine short grass common in high land ; for though Cowan's Bridge is situated on a plain, it is a plain from which there is many a fall and long descent before you and the Leek reach the valley of the Lune. I can hardly understand how the school there came to be so unhealthy, the air all round about was so sweet and thyme-scented, when I visited it last summer. But at this day, every one knows that the site of a building intended for numbers should be chosen with far greater care than that of a private house, from the tendency to illness, both infectious and otherwise, produced by the congregation of people in close proximity.

The house is still remaining that formed part of that occupied by the school. It is a long, low bow-windowed cottage, now divided into two dwellings. It stands facing the Leek, between which and it intervenes a space, about seventy yards deep, that was once the school garden. Running from this building, at right angles with what now remains of the school-house, there was formerly a bobbin-mill connected with the stream, where wooden reels were made out of the alders which grow profusely in such ground as that surrounding Cowan's Bridge.   Mr. Wilson adapted this mill t© his purpose ; there were school-rooms on the lower floor, and dormitories on the upper. The present cottage was occupied by the teachers' rooms, the dining-room and kitchens, and some smaller bed-rooms. On going into this building, I found one part, that nearest to the high road, converted into a poor kind of public-house, then to let, and having all the squalid appearance of a deserted place, which rendered it difficult to judge what it would look like when neatly kept up, the broken panes replaced in the windows, and the rough-cast (now cracked and discoloured) made white and whole. The other end forms a cottage, with the low ceilings and stone floors of a hundred years ago ; the windows do not open freely and widely ; and the passage up- stairs, leading to the bed-rooms, is narrow and tortuous ; altogether, smells would linger about the house, and damp cling to it. But sanitary matters were little understood thirty years ago ; and it was a great thing to get a roomy building close to the high road, and not too far from the habitation of Mr. Wilson, the originator of the educational scheme. There was much need of such an institution ; numbers of ill-paid clergymen hailed the prospect with joy, and eagerly put down the names of their children as pupils when the establishment should be ready to receive them. Mr. Wilson was, no doubt, pleased by the impatience with which the realization of his idea was anticipated, and opened the school with less than a hundred pounds in hand, and, as far as I can make out, from seventy to eighty pupils.

Mr. Wilson felt, most probably, that the responsibility of the whole plan rested upon him. The payment made by the parents was barely enough for food and lodging ; the subscriptions did not flow very freely into an untried scheme ; and great economy was necessary in all the domestic arrangements. He determined to enforce this by frequent personal inspection ; and his love of authority seems to have led to great deal of unnecessary and irritating meddling with little matters. Yet, although there was economy in providing for the household, there does not appear to have been any parsimony. The meat, flour, milk, &c., were contracted for, but were of very fair quality ; and the dietary, which has been shown to me in manuscript, was neither bad nor unwholesome ; nor, on the whole, was it wanting in variety. Oat- meal porridge for breakfast ; a piece of oat-cake for those who required luncheon ; baked and boiled beef, and mutton, potato-pie, and plain homely puddings of different kinds for dinner. At five o'clock, bread and milk for the younger ones ; and one piece of bread (this was the only time at which the food was limited) for the elder pupils, who sat up till a later meal of the same description. Mr. Wilton himself ordered in the food, and was anxious that it should be of good quality. But the cook, who had much of his confidence, and against whom for a long time no one durst utter a complaint, was careless, dirty, and wasteful. To some children oatmeal porridge is distasteful, and consequently unwholesome, even when properly made ; at Cowan's Bridge School it was too often sent up, not merely burnt, but with offensive fragments of other substances discoverable in it. The beef, that should have been carefully salted before it was dressed, had often become tainted from neglect ; and girls, who were schoolfellows with the Brontes, during the reign of the cook of whom I am speaking, tell me that the house seemed to be pervaded, morning, noon, and night, by the odour of rancid fat that steamed out of the oven in which much of their food was prepared, There was the same carelessness in making the puddings ; one of those ordered was rice boiled in water, and eaten with a sauce of treacle and sugar ; but it was often uneatable, because the water had been taken out of the rain-tub, and was strongly impregnated with the dust lodging on the roof, whence it had trickled down into the old wooden cask, which also added its own flavour to that of the original rain water. The milk, too, was often " bingy," to use a country expression for a kind of taint that is far worse than sourness, and suggests the idea that it is caused by want of cleanliness about the milk pans, rather than by the heat of the weather. On Saturdays, a kind of pie, or mixture of potatoes and meat, was served up, which was made of all the fragments accumulated during the week. Scraps of meat from a dirty and disorderly larder, could never be very appetizing ; and, I believe, that this dinner was more loathed than any in the early days of Cowan's Bridge School. One may fancy how repulsive such fare would be to children whose appetites were small, and who had been accustomed to food, far simpler perhaps, but prepared with a delicate cleanliness that made it both tempt- ing and wholesome. Many a meal the little Brontes went without food, although craving with hunger. They were not strong when they came, having only just recovered from a complication of measles and hooping-cough ; indeed, I suspect they had scarcely recovered ; for there was some consultation on the part of the school authorities whether Maria and Elizabeth should be received or not, in July 1824, Mr. Bronte came again, in the September of that year, bringing with him Charlotte and Emily to be admitted as pupils.

It appears strange that Mr. Wilson should not have been informed by the teachers of the way in which the food was served up ; but we must remember that the cook had been known for some time to the Wilson family, while the teachers were brought together for an entirely different work — that of education. They were expressly given to understand that such was their department ; the buying in and management of the provisions rested with Mr. Wilson and the cook. The teachers would, of course, be unwilling to lay any com- plaints on the subject before him ; and when he heard of them, Ms reply was to the effect that the children were to be trained up to regard higher things than dainty pampering of the appetite, and (apparently unconscious of the fact, that daily loathing and rejection of food is sure to undermine the health) he lectured them on the sin of caring over-much for carnal things.

There was another trial of health common to all the girls. The path from Cowan's Bridge to Tunstall Church, where Mr. Wilson preached, and where they all attended on the Sunday, is more than two miles in length, and goes sweeping along the rise and fall of the unsheltered country, in a way to make it a fresh and exhilarating walk in summer, but a bitter cold one in winter, especially to children whose thin blood flowed languidly in consequence of their half-starved condition. The church was not warmed, there being no means for this purpose. It stands in the midst of fields, and the damp mists must have gathered round the walls, and crept in at the windows. The girls took their cold dinner with them, and ate it between the services, in a chamber over the entrance, opening out of the former galleries. The arrangements for this day were peculiarly trying to delicate children, particularly to those who were spiritless, and long- ing for home, as poor Maria Bronte must have been. For her ill health was increasing ; the old cough, the remains of the hooping-cough, lingered about her ; she was far superior in mind to any of her play-fellows and companions, and was lonely amongst them from that very cause ; and yet she had faults so annoying that she was in constant disgrace with her teachers, and an object of merciless dislike to one of them, who is depicted as " Miss Scatcherd " in " Jane Eyre," and whose real name I will be merciful enough not to disclose. I need hardly say, that Helen Burns is as exact a transcript of Maria Bronte as Charlotte's wonderful power of reproducing character could give. Her heart, to the latest day on which we met, still beat with unavailing indignation at the worrying and the cruelty to which her gentle, patient, dying sister had been subjected by this woman. Not a word of that part of " Jane Eyre " but is a literal repetition of scenes between the pupil and the teacher. Those who had beep pupils at the same time knew who must have written the book, from the force with which Helen Burns' sufferings are described. They had, before that, recognized the description of the sweet dignity and benevolence of Miss Temple as only a just tribute to the merits of one whom all that knew her appear to hold in honour ; but when Miss Scatcherd was held up to opprobrium they also recognized in the writer of " Jane Eyre " an unconsciously avenging sister of the sufferer.

One of these fellow-pupils of Charlotte and Maria Bronte's, among other statements even worse, gives me the following : — The dormitory in which Maria slept was a long- room, holding a row of narrow little beds on each side, occupied by the pupils ; and at the end of this dormitory there was a small bed-chamber opening out of it, appropriated to the use of Miss Scatcherd. Maria's bed stood nearest to the door of this room. One morning, after she had become so- seriously unwell as to have had a blister applied to her side (the sore from which was not perfectly healed), when the getting-up bell was heard, poor Maria moaned out that she was so ill, so very ill, she wished she might stop in bed ; and some of the girl? urged her to do so, and said they would explain it all to Miss Temple, the superintendent. But Miss Scatcherd was close at hand, and her anger would have to be faced before Miss Temple's kind thoughtfulness could interfere ; so the sick child began to dress, shivering with cold, as, without leaving her bed, she slowly put on her black worsted stockings over her thin white legs (my informant spoke as if she saw it yet, and her whole face flushed out undying indignation). Just then Miss Scatcherd issued from her room, and, without asking for a word of explanation from the sick and frightened girl, she took her by the arm, on the side to which the blister had been applied, and by one vigorous movement whirled her out into the middle of the floor, abusing her all the time for dirty and untidy habits. There she left her. My informant says, Maria hardly spoke, except to beg some of the more indignant girls to be calm ; but, in slow, trembling movements, with many a pause, she went down stairs at last, — and was punished for being too late.

Any one may fancy how such an event as this would rankle in Charlotte's mind. I only wonder that she did not remonstrate against her father's decision to send her and Emily back to Cowan's Bridge, after Maria's and Elizabeth's deaths. But frequently children are unconscious of the effect which some of their simple revelations would have in altering the opinions entertained by their friends of the persons placed around them. Besides, Charlotte's earnest vigorous mind saw, at an unusually early age, the immense importance of education, as furnishing her with tools which she had the strength and the will to wield, and she would be aware that the Cowan's Bridge education was, in many points, the best that her father could provide for her.

Before Maria Bronte's death, that low fever broke out, in the spring of 1825, which is spoken of in " Jane Eyre." Mr. Wilson was extremely alarmed at the first symptoms of this ; his self-confidence was shaken ; he did not understand what kind of illness it could be, that made the girls too dull and heavy to understand remonstrances, or be roused by texts and spiritual exhortation; but caused them to sink away into dull stupor, and half-unconscious listlessness. He went to a kind motherly woman, who had had some connection with the school — as laundress, I believe — and asked her to come and tell him what was the matter with them. She made herself ready, and drove with him in his gig. "When she entered the school-room, she saw from twelve to fifteen girls lying about ; some resting their aching heads on the table, others on the ground ; all heavy-eyed, flushed, indifferent, and weary, with pains in every limb. Some peculiar odour, she says, made her recognise that they were sickening for " the fever ; " and she told Mr. Wilson so, and that she could not stay there for fear of conveying the infection to her own children ; but he half commanded,  and half en- treated her to remain and nurse them ; and finally mounted his gig and drove away, while she was still urging that she must return to her own house, and to her domestic duties, for which she had provided no substitute. However, when she was left in this unceremonious manner, she determined to make the best of it ; and a most efficient nurse she proved, although, as she says, it was a dreary time. Mr. Wilson supplied every thing ordered by the doctors of the  best quality, and in the most liberal manner ; he even sent for additional advice, in the person of his own brother-in-law, a very clever medical man in Kirby, with whom he had not been on good terms for some time previously ; and it was this doctor who tasted and condemned the daily food of the girls by the expressive action of spitting out a portion which he had taken in order to taste it.   About forty of the girls suffered from this fever, but none of them died at Cowan's Bridge, though one died at her own home, sinking under the state of health which followed it. None of the Bronte's had the fever.   But the same causes, which affected the health of the other pupils through typhus, told more slowly, but not less surely, upon their constitutions. The principal of these causes was the food.

The bad management of the cook was chiefly to be blamed for this ; she was dismissed, and the woman who had been forced against her will to serve as head nurse, took the place of housekeeper ; and henceforward the food was so well prepared that no one could ever reasonably complain of it. Of course it cannot be expected that a new institution, comprising domestic and educational arrangements for nearly a hundred persons, should work quite smoothly at the beginning, and all this occurred during the first two years of the establishment. But Mr. Wilson seems to have had the unlucky gift of irritating even those to whom he meant kindly, and for whom he was making perpetual sacrifices of time and money, by never showing any respect for their independence of opinion and action. He had, too, so little knowledge of human nature as to imagine that, by constantly reminding the girls of their dependent position, and the fact that they were receiving their education from the charity of others, he could make them lowly and humble. Some of the more sensitive felt this treatment bitterly, and instead of being as grateful as they should have been for the real benefits they were obtaining, their mortified pride rose up from its fall a hundred-fold more strong. Painful impressions sink deep into the hearts of delicate and sickly children. What the healthy suffer from but momentarily, and then forget, those who are ailing brood over involuntarily, and remember long — perhaps with no resentment, but simply as a piece of suffering that has been stamped into their very life. The pictures. ideas, and conceptions of character received into the mind of the child of eight years old, were destined to be reproduced in fiery words a quarter of a century afterwards. She saw only one side, and that the unfavourable side of Mr. Wilson ; but many of those who knew him, assure me of the wonderful fidelity with which his disagreeable qualities, his spiritual pride, his love of power, his ignorance of human nature and consequent want of tenderness are represented ; while, at the same time, they regret that the delineation of these should have obliterated, as it were, nearly all that was noble and conscientious.

The recollections left of the four Bronte sisters at this period of their lives, on the minds of those who associated with them, are not very distinct. Wild, strong hearts, and powerful minds, were hidden under an enforced propriety and regularity of demeanour and expression, just as their faces had been concealed by their father, under his stiff, unchanging mask. Maria was delicate, unusually clever and thoughtful for her age, gentle, and untidy. Of her frequent disgrace from this last fault — of her sufferings, so patiently borne — I have already spoken. The only glimpse we get of Elizabeth, through the few years of her short life, is contained in a letter which I have received from Miss " Temple." " The second, Elizabeth, is the only one of the family of whom I have a vivid recollection, from her meeting with a somewhat alarming accident, in consequence of which I had her for some days and nights in my bed-room, not only for the sake of greater quiet, but that I might watch over her myself. Her head was severely cut, but she bore all the consequent suffering with exemplary patience, and by it won much upon my esteem. Of the two younger ones (if two there were) I have very slight recollections, save that one, a darling child, under five years of age, was quite the pet nursling of the schooL" This last would be Emily. Charlotte was considered the most talkative of the sisters — a " bright, clever little child." Her great friend was a certain " Mellany Hane" (so Mr. Bronte spells the name), a West Indian, whose brother paid for her schooling, and who had no remarkable talent except for music, which her brother's circumstances forbade her to cultivate. She was " a hungry, good-natured, ordinary girl;" older than Charlotte, and ever ready to protect her from any petty tyranny or encroachments on the part of the elder girls. Charlotte always remembered her with affection and gratitude.

I have  quoted the word "bright" in the account of Charlotte. I suspect that this year of 1825 was the last time it could ever be applied to her. In this spring, Maria became so rapidly worse that Mr. Bronte was sent for. He had not previously been aware of her illness, and the condition in which he found her was a terrible shock to him. He took her home by the Leeds coach, the girls crowding out into the road to follow her with their eyes over the bridge, past the cottages, and then out of sight for ever. She died a very few days after her arrival at home. Perhaps the news of her death, falling suddenly into the life of which her patient existence had formed a part, only a little week or so before, made those who remained at Cowan's Bridge look with more anxiety on Elizabeth's symptoms, which also turned out to be consumptive. She was sent home in charge of a confidential servant of the establishment ; and she, too, died in the early summer of that year. Charlotte was thus suddenly called into the responsibilities of eldest sister in a motherless family. She remembered how anxiously her dear sister Maria had striven, in her grave earnest way, to be a tender helper and a counsellor to them all ; and the duties that now fell upon her seemed almost like a legacy from the gentle little sufferer so lately dead.

Both Charlotte and Emily returned to school after the Midsummer holidays in this fatal year. But before the next winter, it was thought desirable to advise their removal from school, as it was evident that the damp situation of the house at Cowan's Bridge did not suit their health.

CHAPTER V.

For the reason just stated, the little girls were sent home in the autumn of 1825, when Charlotte was little more than nine years old.

...

https://archive.org/details/lifeofcharlotteb02gask/page/60/mode/2up
The Life of Charlotte Brontë, Vol. II (1857) Elizabeth Gaskell

p28 commenting on reception of "Jane Eyre", Dec 1847

There is little record remaining of the manner in which the first news of its wonderful success reached and affected the one heart of the three sisters. I once asked Charlotte — we were talking about the description of Lowood school, and she was saying that she was not sure whether she should have written it, if she had been aware how instantaneously it would have been identified with Cowan Bridge — whether the popularity to which the novel attained had taken her by surprise. She hesitated a little, and then said : " I believed that what had impressed me so forcibly when I wrote it, must make a strong impression on any one who read it. I was not surprised at those who read ' Jane Eyre ' being deeply interested in it ; but I hardly expected that a book by an unknown author could find readers."


pp60-1

" July 28th.

"Branwell is the same in conduct as ever. His constitution seems much shattered. Papa, and sometimes all of us, have sad nights with him. He sleeps most of the day and consequently will lie awake at night. But has not every house its trial ?"

While her most intimate friends were yet in ignorance of the fact of her authorship of " Jane Eyre," she received a letter from one of them, making inquiries about Casterton School. It is but right to give her answer, written on Au gust 28th, 1848.

"Since you wish to hear from me while you are from home, I will write without further delay. It often happens that when we linger at first in answering a friend's letter, obstacles occur to retard us to an inexcusably late period. In my last, I forgot to answer a question which you asked me, and was sorry afterwards for the omission. I will begin, therefore, by replying to it, though I fear what information I can give will come a little late. You said Mrs. ————— had some thoughts of sending ————— to school, and wished to know whether the Clergy Daughters' School at Casterton was an eligible place. My personal knowledge of that institution is very much out of date, being derived from the experience of twenty years ago. The establishment was at that time in its infancy, and a sad ricketty infancy it was. Typhus fever decimated the school periodically; and consumption and scrofula, in every variety of form bad air and water, bad and insufficient diet can generate, preyed on the ill-fated pupils. It would not then have been a fit place for any of Mrs. ——————'s children; but I understand it is very much altered for the better since those days. The school is removed from Cowan Bridge (a situation as unhealthy as it was picturesque —low, damp, beautiful with wood and water) to Casterton. The accommodations, the diet, the discipline, the system of tuition—all are, I believe, entirely altered and greatly improved. I was told that such pupils as behaved well, and remained at the school till their education was finished, were provided with situations as governesses, if they wished to adopt the vocation, and much care was exercised in the selection; it was added, that they were also furnished with an excellent wardrobe on leaving Casterton. ... . The oldest family in Haworth failed lately, and have quitted the neighbourhood where their fathers resided before them for, it is said, thirteen generations. . . . Papa, I am most thankful to say, continues in very good health, considering his age; his sight, too, rather, I think, improves than deteriorates. My sisters likewise are pretty well."

---

Concerted campaign against Gaskell's characterisation of W. Carus Wilson and the Cowan's Bridge School.

The following letter appeared widely.

```{admonition} TO DO
:class: dropdown
[Morning Herald (London) - Friday 24 April 1857](https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0002408/18570424/072/0005)

"JANE EYRE." TO THE EDITOR OF THE MORNING HERALD. Sir,—Allow me to make a few remarks on the "Life of Charlotte Bronte," by Mrs. Gaskell, which will be one of the popular works of the day.

I chiefly wish to call attention to the unfounded statements made on the Clergy Daughters' School, where Miss Bronte commenced her school career, when it was at Cowan Bridge.

I have seen letters from teachers and pupils who were there with her, denying all that she stated regarding that invaluable institution; and the lady who was superintendent at the time sent to a review, which was published, a long letter condemning the whole account in "Jane Eyre."

Miss Bronte left the school at the age of nine, Mrs. Gaskell tells us, so what judgment could she form? And her father being a very austere and peculiar man, denying his children animal food, and they all being naturally very delicate, as we read also in Mrs. Gaskell's work, is it fair to trace all her sufferings in after life to the very short time she was at the establishment, as Mrs. Gaskell also informs us?

The attack on my father, the Rev. W. Carus Wilson, coming from the pen of Mrs. Gaskell, who is, I believe, the wife of a Socinian preacher, is intended, from the strain of the whole work, as a sneer at the Evangelical party in the Church.

My father has spent a long life solely for the good of others; and though, from his independent position in life, and the wonderful way in which God has prospered every work he has undertaken for the good of the Church and his fellow creatures, he might have much to boast of, yet I can truly say there lives not a man with a lower opinion of himself, or more opposite to the character Mrs. Gaskell has sketched of him.

Your obedient servant,  
W. W. CARUS WILSON.
```


```{admonition} TO DO
:class: dropdown

[Leeds Mercury - Saturday 16 May 1857](https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/BL/0000076/18570516/017/0007)

CHARLOTTE BRONTE. TO THE EDITORS OF THE LEEDS MERCURY. GENTLEMEN,—

May I ask for a corner for the following, taken out of a Review, which is a complete answer to the Statements in the Life of Charlotte Bronte regarding my father's charitable institutions.— Yours,  
W. W. CARUS WILSON.

The letter then quotes at length from a review that was also circulated widely, as in the following example:

```{admonition} TO DO
:class: dropdown

[Essex Standard - Friday 22 May 1857](https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000165/18570522/043/0006)

NEW PUBLICATION

The Life of Charlotte Bronte. "By Mrs. Gaskell, London: Smith, Elder, and Co.

Those who have enjoyed the literary luxury of such works as "Jane Eyre," "Shirley," and " Villette," will peruse with much interest the life of their gifted authoress. Mrs. Gaskell has given to the public a deeply-interesting memoir, and we can hardly realize the mournful fact that Charlotte Bronte now sleeps beneath those wild Yorkshire hills that nursed her genius. But such is the case, and the pen of praise or blame will fall but lightly now upon her tomb.

We remember that on the appearance of "Jane Eyre," it was severely censured by the Quarterly, the Times, and other leading reviews and papers, for its coarse expressions and immoral tendencies. There was a profanity prevading many of its pages, and we grieve to find the same irreverent turn given to passages from Scripture in some parts of Miss Bronte's letters, which appear in her Life by Mrs. Gaskell, and which will make this certainly most touching memoir a prohibited book with many, as was "Jane Eyre." Such expressions, for instance, as the following:— Miss Bronte, in writing to a friend, addresses her as only " a little lower than the angels." Again, in pointing to a picture of Thackeray, for whom she had unbounded worship, she exclaimed to a friend, "A lion shall come out of Judah." Too many other passages of a similar strain in this work could be quoted. It is the Rev. H. Melvill who observes that "it is to sharpen every arrow of the devil to sharpen our wit on the Bible ; " and we cannot see how any one can imagine that the insertion of irreverent expressions can in any tale or memoir add force or interest.

The closing hour, pictured by Mrs. Gaskell, is very painful. Miss Bronte entered into eternity, not with the bright light and joy that cheered and comforted " Leila Ada," or an " Adelaide Newton," but with the simple exclamation (her last on earth) to her husband, " Oh, I am not going to die, am I?— He won't separate us, we have been so happy together!"

She could not have been without religious impressions; we may be sure that in such au establishment as the "Clergy Daughters' School " the seeds of good must have been sown in her ; but we fear her great talents were a snare— they were not used in after-life for the glory and honour of her God. Can we wonder, then, at the bitter attack she made in "Jane Eyre " on the "Clergy Daughters' School," and on the Rev. W. Carus Wilson, its benevolent founder? And, if report be true that Mrs. Gaskell is a Socinian, does she seek to aim a blow at our Church by such unjust and quite unnecessary personal remarks on so influential a member of it?

No one can have laboured so publicly and usefully for the cause of evangelical truth as the Rev. W. Carus Wilson has done without meeting with opponents, and perhaps enemies— but, we are informed by those best capable of judging, that the character sketched of him by Mrs. Gaskell is as false as the assertions about the school at Cowan Bridge.

With much that many might boast of, and envy, the wonderful way in which God has prospered every work he has undertaken, whether it be as regards the charitable institutions he established about 30 years ago ; or his periodicals that so many have owed their conversion to ; or the churches entrusted to him (in the building of some of which he was instrumental) ; or whether as regards his independent fortune, which raises him far above the malicious insinuations of Miss Bronte, that the pupils in the charitable institutions under his control "were starved "—yet we are assured that no one has a lower opinion of himself than Mr. Wilson, or a deeper feeling of thelittle he has done, now, at the close of a long life, spent only for the good of his fellow-creatures.

Mrs. Gaskell, knowing nothing of him or the schools personally, must have grounded her remarks as to his " love of power", his "spiritual pride," his reminding the pupils of their "dependent condition" (a thing most opposite to his nature, for no one was more beloved by them), on the testimony of some enemy, perhaps a turned-off teacher or pupil.

Now, we are in a position to state that when "Jane Eyre " came out many old pupils and teachers, who were at Cowan Bridge when Miss Bronte was there, wrote to Mr. Wilson's family, denying and grieving over her statements as to " bad diet and treatment," &c; and the lady who was the superintendent of that institution in 1824 (whose husband now heads a college in America) wrote in 1855 a long and complete answer to all the assertions in "Jane Eyre." and her able letter appeared in a Review. We wish we could have inserted all this important letter, but we have only space for the following extract. She says : —

"The columns of the leading papers have been for some time past much occupied with obituary notices of the late Miss Bronte and many conveying the impression that her treatment at the Clergy Daughters' School when at Cowan Bridge, was of a character not only to affect her health, but to darken her prospects in afterlife. Now, as I have it in my power entirely to refute these charges. I should consider myself guilty in a measure concerning them, did I not make known to the world the truth of the case, and thereby exonerate an excellent and eminently useful clergyman from the imputations cast on him in 'Jane Eyre,' as well as to vindicate an institution which has been to the Poverty-stricken clergy a blessing of inestimable value."

She then goes on to say —

"In July, 1824, the Rev. Mr. Bronte arrived at Cowan Bridge with two of his daughters, Maria and Elizabeth ; the children were so delicate that there were doubts whether they could be admitted into the school. They were received, and went on so well that their father brought in September two more, Charlotte and Emily. During both these visits Mr. Bronte stayed at the school, sat at the table with the pupils, and saw the whole routine of the establishment. They all inherited consumption from their mother and were taken home; none of them, as has been stated, had any attack of fever or died at the school. I can truly say that none of the pupils were denied a sufficient quantity of food; they were never limited ; meat, vegetable, and puddings daily in abundance; any statement to the contrary is most false. Charlotte was a bright, clever, happy little girl, never in disgrace. In size remarkably diminutive, and if, as has been asserted, she never grew an inch after leaving the school, she must have been a literal dwarf. * * * Let us hope that in caricaturing an institution which has been such a blessing to the daughters of her own Church she had no injurious motives, but, misled by a vivid imagination, and a dim recollection of thirty years, when she was but a child, she published in an unguarded moment, unmindful of the consequences, mis-statements, the tendency of which has been to calumniate a most excellent institution, and to bring disgrace on religion. * * * When it is known that I have been absent 12 years from my native land, and 10 years previously had withdrawn, from conscientious motives from the Church of England, I think I need not fear being considered a partisan ; my only object is to do justice, and to state to the public things as they have been and are."

The whole of this letter Mrs. Gaskell must have seen, as she quotes one sentence out of it word for word, but has carefully suppressed all in it that bears so favourably on the school. She allows "it is a subject she approaches with the greatest difficulty"; and, admitting an improvement in the school seems greatly puzzled how to do this, and yet defend her friend's assertions in "Jane Eyre."

With the above we would take the testimony of hundreds of pupils, who with their parents have gratefully acknowledged the advantages they received at these institutions, rather than the account of one, however talented, who when but a child of nine left the establishment, and has so ungenerously cast an odium upon him who first planned such a help to our poorer clergy, and who has yearly undertaken the risk of the support of near 800 pupils and teachers ; for, including a preparatory school, there are about 150 daughters of clergymen boarded, clothed, and educated, at only £14 a-year each, including everything, and, in the "Servants' School," above 100 girls trained for service, each paying but £10 a-year. The schools are situated in Westmoreland, built on Mr. Carus Wilson's property, half-a-mile from Casterton Hall, his residence. They stand amid beautiful scenery, on high and healthy situations. They require above £1,000 a-year, in addition to the payment of the pupils, to cover all expenses.

We read further in the " Life" that Mr. Bronte was an austere and peculiar man, denying his children animal food, &c., and that they were all naturally very delicate. It is hardly fair then to trace, as is done, all Miss Bronte's after-sufferings to Cowan Bridge. The statement, too, is false, that "fever decimated the pupils yearly ;" there have been but two attacks since the schools were established, which only carried off 6 pupils.

Mrs. Gaskell says that Miss Bronte often regretted her remarks in "Jane Eyre" about the school, as she never thought it would have been so identified. Why then should Mrs. Gaskell have continued them in the "Life". Would it not have been fairer to have given a fuller and more favourable account of the schools ; for in her visit to Cowan Bridge last year, so close to Casterton, she most probably would have visited them, and witnessed their flourishing condition under the able management of a committee, during Mr. Wilson's long absence from ill health? We have not space at present to touch on any parts of the second volume of this popular work, and have only dwelt on those in the first that we consider most open to criticism.

Were the work free from those objectionable points it might be capable of good ; for who can picture the struggles of the suffering sisters, lonely and friendless, in the seclusion of Haworth Parsonage; their affliction with their brother (so public a notice of whom we think a great pity) ; their resignation and devotion to their father, and not extol that peculiar ardour which led them to overcome every obstacle, and to cast such a meteor on the crowded paths of literature? Much as we must admire Miss Bronte's genius we cannot altogether eulogise her character; it seems to have imbibed the coldness and isolation of Haworth. But when we consider her solitude and sufferings we are the more disposed to draw the curtain over much we could have wished otherwise, beyond what we have noticed, in one so gifted, and who by her pen has shed such lustre on the literary world.

Note.— The substance of the above Review, in the shape of a letter, has appeared in the Times, Morning Herald. Daily News, Record, and other papers.

```