# The Pittis Libel Case


---
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001417/18560301/027/0005
Isle of Wight Mercury - Saturday 01 March 1856

BOROUGH PETTY SESSIONS, Monday Feb. 25

Before J. H. Hearn Esq. (Mayor), Thomas Cooke and Edward Way, Esqrs.

James Lewis, alias Nobby Ducks, who had been taken into custody on Saturday evening, for selling the letter of the Rev. W. Carus Wilson, in answer to one sent him by the Mayor of Newport, respecting the tract "the Tempters and Tempted," appeared in court. The defendant had been liberated on his own bail, and retained Mr. George Prince Joyce as his legal adviser. It was told on his appearing in the box that there war charge against then put several questions to the Bench, but was answered that his client was discharged. He applied for an order for the restitution of the pamphlets, and was referred to the inspector of Police.

COUNTY POLICE

Libel Case.— An extraordinary meeting of the County Magistrates was held on Monday, at the Guildhall, to hear the charge made by Mr. Francis Pittis, of Newport, against the Rey. W. Carus Wilson, for having written a false and scandalous libel on his character. The court-room and gallery were crowded with persons of interest of the Town, and other parts of the Island. The Bench consisted of the Hon. a'Court Holmes (chairman), Sir John Simeon, Bart., Capt. Kerr, Capt. Brigstocke, Thomas Cooke. and J. A. Hambrough, Esqrs.

Mr. Eldridge appeared for the prosecutor, and Mr. Ford for the defendant. The latter handed in a Medical Certificate that the health of the defendant would not allow of his appearing that day. The case proceeded without his presence. Mr. Eldridge observed that it had been said a good name was a man's best inheritance, it certainly was above all earthly treasure. He was bound to say, his client had the respect of all who knew him, and he must say that the high and honourable position which Mr. Pittis holds, as Alderman of the Borough, makes him careful of not allowing even shadows to be cast on his reputation. In a certain tract, imputations are thrown on his character, and although he feels free front all aspersions, he could not allow them to pass, whether intended or not, without a public denial of their application. He believed they were not intended, but that the defendant, with great zeal, had exceeded his duty ; for when a man steps out of his way, on the delicate ground of private character, he must treat the subject in a delicate manner, and not rush hastily to commit wrong; because he might think there was some good in the distance. No one who reads the tract and pamphlet, can doubt that they reflect seriously on the character of the town, and on individuals; it is not simply a degree of bitterness, but there are the most unwarranted innondoes. He did not stand as an apologist for vice; but it was a most unfortunate circumstance, that when a memorial had been presented to the magistrates which they admitted would check crime and immorality, that these works should have been brought out. He admitted there was much evil, and when he had the honour of filling the office of first magistrate, he, like those in office now, could only deal with cases brought before him. There were cases of gross immoral houses always complained of, by parties, who would never come forward to prove the cases within their own observation. Plain allusions had been made in the pamphlet to the Town Clerk,—he would say, that his observations in the council were misunderstood and misreported. He was sensible of the evils in the Town, and with others had endeavoured to diminish the amount. A certain journal came before him, but only shewing the operations of the society. It did not refer to any member in the council, or to any one in authority; it was merely a record of the poor persons who had been visited. An apology of an ample character having been given completely satisfactory, Mr. Pittis felt he had done his duty to himself, and wished to show he had no vindictive motives.

A letter was then brought forward and read.

Mr. Ford said he represented Mr. Wilson, and he regretted that of the observations made by Mr. Eldridge, would compel him to say more than he had intended, which was simply to offer the fullest apology and explanation to Mr. Pittis. Mr. Eldridge had shown that Mr. Wilson was fully justified in the course he had taken, by the admissions made by himself: on the part of Mr. Wilson he was instructed to say, that that gentleman had the fullest confidence in the integrity and strict morality of Mr. Pittis, and that the quotation from the letter of a friend at Bristol, although one or two circumstances appeared to correspond, had no reference to him, and he begged again to say that there was no imputation intended to be conveyed, and read the letter purporting to be one from Bristol.— Mr. Ford said that if there should be a republication, the passage affecting Mr. Pittis should be taken out.— Mr. Hearn attempted to express his dissent from the course adopted, but was stopped by Mr. Ford, who said that he and the bench had only to do with Mr. Pittis, it was quite irregular.—The chairman after a consultation, said, that as the case had been compromised, they were of opinion that Mr. Hearn should not be heard. Others were affected besides Mr. Pittis.— Mr. Hearn said that others were implicated in the charges, and the apology was made to them, he would not be precluded from taking proceedings in another place.— Mr. Eldridge observed that Mr. Pittis felt that after this ample apology, he should not be acting as a man or a Christian to press the case.— The chairman said that the course pursued was very creditable to both parties. Mr. Pittis very properly came forward to vindicate his character from the vile suspicion. With regard to the pamphlet, every one must see that it was intended for Mr. Pittis, but no one would believe it of him. He hoped Mr. Wilson's friends would advise him better than to re-issue the tracts. He could not perhaps control his zeal, but he hoped he would not use it in such an uncalled for way. He was sorry that Mr. Pittis should have had occasion to appear that day. Mr. Wilson said the quotation did not apply to Mr. Pittis, and they were bound to believe him.

----
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000494/18560301/045/0007
Hampshire Advertiser - Saturday 01 March 1856

CHARGE AGAINST THE REV. WM. CARUS WILSON FOR DEFAMATION OF CHARACTER.

The town has been in a state of ferment for the last few days, in consequence of a second pamphlet published by this gentleman, in reply to a letter from the Mayor, J. H. Hearn, esq. on behalf of the town, condemnatory of his proceedings in reference to his first tract. There being certain portions in this last pamphlet which were considered libellous, and particularly in one apparently glaring instance, whereby the character of a principal tradesman of our town was believed to be maligned, placards were issued cautioning persons against their circulation; and on Saturday James Lewis, alias " Nobby Dux," was taken to the Station-house, and bound over in his own recognisances for his appearance to answer the charge of publicly selling this obnoxious tract in the Beast Market on that day. On Monday he appeared before the Borough Magistrates, but was dismissed, as the charge of libel concerning Francis Pittis, esq. by the rev. defendant was just about being proceeded with.

The Town Hall was crowded to excess for some considerable time previously to the case coming on.

The Hon. A'Court Holmes occupied the chair, and on the Bench we observed Sir John Simeon, bart. Captains Brigstocke and Kerr, A. Hamborough, esq. and other gentlemen. The charge against the rev. gentleman was, "That he unlawfully and maliciously did publish a certain false and defamatory libel of and concerning Francis Pittis."

James Eldridge, esq. (brother-in-law of the plaintiff) attended for the prosecution ; and Henry Ford. Esq. (of the firm of Messrs. Ford, solicitor, of Portsea) appeared for the defendant.

The Rev. Carus Wilson was not present, and Mr. Ford put into Court a certificate of illness, stating he was confined to his room from indisposition.

J Eldridge, esq. opened the case by observing it had been well said that a man's good name was his wealth, and anything uttered derogatory to his fair fame was calculated to be injurious to him in many respects. Thus Mr. Francis Pittis, for whom he that day appeared, felt himself bound to vindicate his character against the aspersions which he considered had been made by the Rev. Wm. Carus Wilson respecting him, in a pamphlet he had lately addressed to the Mayor of Newport, and which had been the cause of the present legal proceedings. Mr. Pittis held a high and honourable position as an Alderman of their borough, and his standing in society was such that he was certain his fellow-townsmen would never attach to him the slightest imputation of the nature contained in that tract. Therefore, he could not but prosecute the present proceedings, which he felt was due to himself and to the town, however painful it was to his feelings to do so. He would not say that the rev. gentleman did, by the publication of that pamphlet, wittingly and maliciously asperse and defame the character of Mr. Pittis. although it was evident a certain paragraph in it did refer to him, and must have had that effect had not the present proceedings been instituted. He (Mr. Eldridge) believed that the defendant was a good man, and no doubt meant well ; but he had acted most indiscreetly. According to his own showing he was on delicate ground; and when a person stepped out of his way, even with the philanthropic object he professed to have in view, he should be careful how he rudely trod upon the fair fame of one whom he acknowledged not even to have known by name. A great deal had been said in the town about another tract- "Tempters and Tempted," out of which the present pamphlet had originated. Of the merits or demerits of this first tract he would say nothing, as the libel which Mr. Pittis complained of was contained in the latter ; and no one reading certain lines In the 13th page of the last pamphlet, and acquainted with his client, and events which had happened in their town within the last three years, could have the slightest hesitation in saying that they referred to him and reflected upon his character. He (Mr. Eldridge) felt himself bound further to say, that besides the false and defamatory libel he bad referred to affecting the character of Mr. Pittis, the pamphlet was, in his opinion, not dictated by a Christian spirit; it was penned with a degree of bitterness and exaggeration, and contained unfounded imputations, inuendoes, and sweeping censures, injuriously affecting the character of the Magistrates of the borough, and the inhabitants of the town generally, and not at all creditable to the position of the defendant as a gentleman and a clergyman. Whilst he spoke thus stringently of his conduct, he would wish to be understood that he did not stand there as the apologist for vices which were, unfortunately, too common in their town, although he believed not more so than in other localities; neither did he uphold the evil doings of such men who were well described by the reverend gentlemen as " the mean and dastardly betrayers of female innocence." It was unfortunate for the case of Mr. Wilson, that his pamphlet did not appear until after the Magistrates had earnestly directed their attention to the moral state of the borough, in which they had been strengthened by an influential memorial which had been presented to them, and he (Mr. Eldridge) felt happy in stating that the authorities had not been slack in determinedly and impartially using their endeavours to put down vice and immorality in the town. It was due to them that he should thus publicly state this fact, and he considered it was right the rev. gentleman should know it. He (Mr. Eldridge) had filled the office of Chief Magistrate of their borough, and, consequently, knew from experience they could deal with open immorality only. He instanced a case which came under his own knowledge while presiding over them aa Mayor. He knew there was a certain house of ill-fame, where the worst of vices were carried on ; he went to the neighbours, who were cognisant of the fact and the only parties who could testify to it ; but none could be induced to give the necessary testimony, in consequence of which his efforts to remove the evil were frustrated. He mentioned this circumstance to show the rev. gentleman and his informants how difficult it was to deal with such cases. Reference had been made to him in the pamphlet, as to what he, as their Town Clerk, had said at a late Town Council meeting, in a discussion on the defendant's first tract. He must be permitted to say that his observations on that occasion had been misrepresented in the town, and somewhat mis-reported, and from these circumstances certain parties in the Town Council had been pointed to as if his remarks had referred to them. He wished thus publicly to state, that while there were many things in the Town Missionary's journal, showing the immoralities which unhappily existed among those he was in the habit of visiting, there was no record impugning the characters of those not under actual visitation. What he then was about to state was, that " unhappily some painful circumstances had occurred amongst persons of a higher class"— At this point of his observations the Mayor stopped him, and nothing further was said by him. He (Mr. Eldridge) would most distinctly state that he did not refer to any one in the Town Council, or to any other person in authority, but to one or two cases which were well-known to the town. In conclusion, he would state that Mr. Pittis was wholly and entirely innocent of the charge alleged against him in the pamphlet. He would not, however, proceed further at present, as he understood that Mr. Ford, on the part of the defendant, was ready to offer an explanation and apology ; and he should, therefore, pause to hear if it were of such a full and ample character as he could advise Mr. Pittis to accept.

Mr. H. Ford rose to reply. He regretted Mr. Pittis had been so hastily led to the conclusion that the pamphlet, in reply to the Mayor's letter to his client respecting a former tract, contained libellous and defamatory remarks respecting him. What the rev. gentleman had done in these pamphlets was to write against the vice and immorality which existed generally in Newport : and Mr. Eldridge, in opening the case, had admitted that fact, by stating that a deputation bad appealed to the magistrates as to the existing bad state of the borough in this respect. With regard to the imputation which was said to apply to Mr. Pittis, his own character and standing in the town should have eased his conscience or any anxiety he is said to have felt in the matter ; and he (Mr. Ford) could not but think that he had unhappily been induced to take these proceedings against his client, through the persuasions of others, that the objectionable sentence upon which this inquiry had been raised referred to him. He was pleased, however, to be able to prove most conclusively that when Mr. Wilson penned these words, the notion never for one moment entered his mind that they would in any way apply to him, having never heard aught of that gentleman beyond his bearing a character for the strictest integrity and the greatest morality. His client had certainly discovered, since the publication of that pamphlet, that there were one or two circumstances bearing on a former official position of Mr. Pittis in their town, which did seem to give a colouring to the assertion complained of as applying to him ; but be would most emphatically assure them, that from an investigation he had made, he was enabled to state that the Rev. Mr. Wilson never received the least intimation from any individual detrimental to that gentleman'a character; and to show the Bench that his client was desirous of removing this false impression as soon as he knew of its existence, he (defendant) wrote the following letter to Mr. Pittis, which he would read to the Court :—

" Boniface-house, 23rd February, 1856.  
"Dear Sir,— Your letter to Mr. Gastar has been read to me in bed, from which serious illness prevents my rising.

" I cannot delay a moment in relieving the wounded feelings which must necessarily have been created if you supposed that I intended to make the slightest reference, directly or indirectly, in any part, either of the tract or letter, to yourself, or any other magistrate of the town of Newport.

"The passage you refer to was entirely taken from a letter sent to me from Bristol, from a party wholly unacquainted with Newport, as a comment upon my endeavours to show where the root of the evil too often lies, and was wholly of a general character, and irrespective of any particular locality.

"I particularly regret that any one should have supposed the passage to refer to yourself, as I had always heard and thought of you with the greatest respect.

" I am, sir, your's faithfully,

" F. Pittis. Esq." " Wm. Carus Wilson.

In order further to satisfy Mr. Pittis, he (Mr. Ford) had shown him the original letter which his client had received from Bristol. He trusted that this public avowal on behalf of his client would be sufficient to meet the circumstances of the case; and he would give his pledge that whatever farther use might be made of the pamphlet in question it should be suppressed in its present form, and he would remove the three or four lines from it which had been considered offensive. Mr. Pittis at the same time would be at liberty to make whatever use he pleased of the correspondence he had in his possession on the subject, and he trusted that the explanation which had been given, and the apology he had made on the part of his client, would be sufficient to satisfy Mr. Pittis and the town generally.

J. S. Hearne, esq. here rose and said, that as the Mayor of Newport he could not in duty to the town, could not allow the present opportunity to pass without—

Here he was stopped by Mr. Ford, who insisted that such a procedure on the part of Mr. Hearn was most improper, and no one knew better than he did that it was out of all order.

The Mayor, however, persisted, amidst the suppressed applause of the court. The bench had power to decide, and he therefore appealed to the honourable chairman.

After a minute's consultation, the Bench observed, as they believed the apology which had been made on the part of the defendant would most probably be accepted, they did not consider that as the town of Newport generally had been referred to in the case, Mr. Hearn, as its chief magistrate, should be debarred from making some observation with reference thereto.

Mr. Ford responded, that he trusted Mr. Hearn would be guarded in his remarks, and not make any charge affecting his client.

Mr. Hearn observed, all he rose to say was— that the apology offered Mr. Pittis, on the part of the defendant, should by no means preclude him from preferring a charge against him in another place on behalf of the borough, should he be so advised (a burst of applause here ran through the court).

Mr. Eldridge then rose, and said be was instructed by Mr. Pittis to state that he had accepted the apology of Mr. Ford on the part of the rev. defendant, and he felt he would not be acting the part of a Christian if he had refused to do so. With respect to the steps he had taken, he did not see how be could have acted otherwise. Let them look at the circumstances of the case. In 1854, Mr. Pittis, as their chief magistrate, attended the laying of the foundation stone of their new church, on which occasion they were honoured with the presence of the consort of her Gracious Majesty, the Prince Albert. He (Mr. P.) afterwards presided at a dinner at the Town Hall—there toasted the health of the Bishop of Winchester—and spoke of the church of his forefathers. Now let them compare these circumstances with the following extract from defendant's pamphlet :-" Of the magistrate who presides at a dinner toasting a Bishop after the consecration of a church, and spouting about the church of our forefathers." [Mr. Eldridge did not finish the sentence, which contains the libel-" while known to be a frequenter of the brothel."] And then let any person say whether or not they would not have taken these remarks as reflecting upon Mr. Pittis as their then Mayor, and referring to no other person. He did trust that in future Mr. Wilson would be really cautious in publishing and putting into circulation stories affecting the characters of individuals, obtained from the loose assertions of others— and of which he admitted he had no personal knowledge whatever. Such conduct he could not but say was most derogatory to the Christian Character

At the conclusion of Mr. Eldridge'a observations, the crowded court signified their approbation by several outbursts of applause. The Hon Chairman observed, that the course which Mr. Pittis had pursued on the matter was in every respect a very proper one, and his acceptation of the explanation and apology which had been given in behalf of the defendant was most honourable to him. The steps he had taken were only such as were necessary to vindicate his character from the imputations which certainly did previously appear to the Bench to have been levelled at him ; although he would not for one moment believe the censure implied in the pamphlet as referring to him found a single response in the public mind. It would be superfluous on the part of the Bench to state that the well known moral character of Mr. Pittis —his standing in society, and the high estimation in which he was held by all who knew him, raised him above any foul aspersions which might be uttered regarding him ; and as they had heard what defendant by his counsel had said respecting the offensive paragraph in the pamphlet, and that he most distinctly asserted he did not in any way allude to him, he (the Chairman) considered it was unnecessary to make any further remarks about it. But he could not refrain from saying, that he considered such tracts as those the rev. gentleman had thought proper to publish and put in circulation, affecting the town of Newport, were quite uncalled for and most injudicious, and not at all reputable on the part of the defendant ; and he did trust he would altogether withdraw them, and be better advised in future.

After expressions of approbation on the part of the assembly, the Court broke up.

Mr. Thomas Butler, printer, of Ryde, and Mr. Henry Medley, of Ventnor (the printer of the last pamphlet), were also indicted, but they were not called upon.


---
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000069/18560301/012/0004
Hampshire Telegraph - Saturday 01 March 1856

At the Borough Petty bessions, on Monday, before the Mayor, Thomas Cooke, and Edwvard Way, Esqrs.

James Lewis, who had been taken into custody on Saturday evening, but liberated on his own recognizance, for whom Mr. G. P. Joyce appeared, was told there wae no charge against him. It appeared that in oonsequuene of a caution signed by Mr. Eldridge, Town Clerk, that the pamphlet containing a letter of the Rev. Carus Wilson, in answer to the Mayer of Newport, was a libel, the defendant was taken into custody for selling the book. Mr. Joyce Wished to know by what authority his client had been taken into custody, and also whether the books would be returned. The Mayor said there was noe charge made against Jammes Lewis, and he must apply to the Inspector of Police respecting the books.

"TEMPTERS AND TEMPTED."

At the County Police Court, on Wednesday, before the  Hon. A'Court Holmes, Chairman, Sir John Simeon, Bt., Capt. Kerr, Thomas Cooke, Esq. Capt. Brigstocke, R.N., and J. A. Hamburgh, Esq., the Rev. Wm. Carus Wilson was charged with writing a false, scandalous, and malicious libel on Mr. Francis Pittis. The Court was crowded in every part, and the proceedinas excited the most intense interest. The libel arose out of the publicatioin of a tract, "The Tempters and Tempted; or a solemn Address and Warning to the Inhabitants of the Town And Neighbourhood;" in which the state of morals is put as the very worst that language can describe; and fierce denunciations are hurled on its devoted population. At a meeting of the Town Council a strong denial of the justice of the charges was made and the conduct of the conduct of the author, Mr. Carus Wilson, his informants, and the distributors of the tracts, was severely condemned. The Mayor was requested to write to Mr. Wilson a statement of the views and feelings of the Council on the subject, which he complied with ; and then Mr. Wilson wrote and published answer to the letter, as a tract, in which the former charges were repeated, and many new ones made. The charge against Mr. Pittis wasof that gross character that he felt it to be his duty to take criminal proceedings against Mr. Wilson, and the Magistrates now  assembled to hear the case. Mr. Eldridge was engaged for the prosecution, and Mr. Ford, of Portsea, for the defence.

Mr. Ford handed in a medical certificate that the state of the health of the defendant would not allows him to appear in Coart ; and, after some delay, the case went on in his absence.

Mr. Eldridge stated that a man's good name was his best inheritance; it certainly was his highest earthily treasure ; and he must say that from the high and honourable position held by Mr. Pittis in private life, and as an Alderman of the Borough, he could not allow the aspersion cast on his character by the letter of the defendant to pass without public notice and contradiction. He did not believe that the defendant intended wrong; but withgreat zeal, he did not unite that care which ought to guide the course of one who takes part in public affairs— for when a man steps out of his way on the delicate ground of private character, he should touch it gently, and not rush hastily and do injustice because he fancies there is some good to be done in the distance. No one can read the pamphlet but must observe it reflects most severely on the character of these attacked: it is not simply a reply to the letter of the Mayor, but it displays a degree of bitterness and unwarranted inuendo against others, highly to be condemned. He did not stand there as an apologist for vice or immorality, but it was an unfortunate circumstance, that just at the time that a memorial had been presented to the Magistrates, and measures were in progreas to remedy some evils, that the rev. gentleman should have made such attacks; he and others should know that maogistrates could only deal with cases brought before them. While Mr. Pttis had the honour of sitting as first magistrate of the borough, those very persons who complained of the gross immorality of houses in their immediate neighbourhood, could not be induced to come forward to give evidence necessary to ensure a conviction. Allusions had been made to himself (the Town Clerk), and his observations had been misunderstood and misrepresenred respecting a certain journal that came before him. Now that journal did no refer to any member of the Council, or persons its authority, but merely to the cases visited by the Town Mission, persons of the lowest class. He felt pleased that he should not take up the further time of the Court by this pressing the case, as an ample apology had been sent from Mr. Wilson, which would be read; and he considered Mr. Pittis had done his duty in vindicating his character.

Mr. Ford said, he had the honour to represent the Rev. Carus Wilson, and but for the observation of the gentleman who had brought the case before the Court, he should give an explanation, and express regret that the passage was supposed to refer to Mr. Pittis. He must nowy say, that his client was perfectly justified in the course he had taken; and Mr. Eldridge's remarks confirm the correctness of the state of the town. On the part of Mr. Wilson he begged to state, that he had the highest opinion of the great respectability, integrity, and strict morality of Mr. Pittis; he begged again to say, that no imputationa was intended to be conveyed. He then read the following letter :—
    
Boniface house, Feb. 23, 1856.

[To: "F. Pittis, Esq."]

"Dear Sir,— Your letter to Mr. Gustar has been read to me in bed, from which serious illness prevents me rising.

I cannot delay a moment in relieving the wounded feelings which must necessarily hasve been created if you supposed that I intended to make the slighitest reference, directly or indirectly in any part either of the tract or letter, to yourself or any other magistrate of the town of Newport.

"The passage you refer to was entirely taken fromn a letter sent me from Bristol, from a party wholly unacquainted with Newport, as a comment upon my endeavours to show where the root of the evil too often lies, and was wholly of a general character and irrespective of any particular locality. I particularly regret that any one should have supposed the passage to refer to yourself, as I had always heard and thought of you with the greatest respect.  
"I am, Sir, your's faithfully,  
Wm. CARUS WILSON.

Mr. Hearn said, as Mayopr he was not satisfied; the other libels on the Town and individuals remained uncontradicted.

Mr. Ford protested that the observations of Mr. Hearn were irregular ; he had only to do with Mr. Pittis.

Mr. Hearn.— There are other charges, and this will not preclude me from taking proceedings in another court.

Mr. Eldridge said of Mr. Pittis that "he feels after the ample apology he should not be acting as a man or a christian to proceed further in the case."

The Chairman observed, that the course pursued was very creditable to both parties. Mr. Pittis vindicates his character from the vile suspicion which might have rested on it, although there was no response in the public, for although all must know that the passage applied to Mr. Pittis, no one would believe there was any foundation for the aspersion. No person could help his zeal, but he trusted Mr. Wilson would direct it better; he hoped he would not re-issue tracts to wound the feelings of others in such an uncalled for manner; and he was sorry Mr. Pittis should have had occasions to appear there that day. Mr. Wilson said that the passage was not intended to apply to Mr. Pittis, and perhaaps they were bound to believe it.