# Tempter and Tempted

In the early summer of 1855, the [Saturday 30 June, 1855](https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000170/18550630/030/0004), edition of the *Isle of Wight Observer* records in its *Fashionable List* that the Rev. Carus Wilson, and his wife, Mrs Wilson, were in reseidence at Pulpit Rock Villa, Ventnor, Isle of Wight, then moving to St. Boniface House, Ventnor by [Saturday 11 August 1855](https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000170/18550811/022/0004).

Carus Wilson was a retired evangelical Christian, founder in 1823 of the Clergy Daughters' School, Cowan Bridge, on the Lancashire side of the Lancashire, Cumbria and West Riding of Yorkshire border, and  *The Children's Friend* magazine, launched in 1824, and author of [Child's First Tales, Chiefly in Words of One Syllable, for the use of Infant Schools and Little Children in General (2 volumes?)](https://archive.org/details/McGillLibrary-rbsc_child-first-tales_61610677-21770/page/n3/mode/2up).

Presumably as a result of a perceived lack of response to the memorial to the Newport magistrates, Carus Wilson published a tract early in 1856 that appears to have been even more outspoken in its condemnation of the vices of Newport and perhaps the threat they posed to the morals of the young men stationed in Parkhurst Barracks.

The pamphlet was entitled *Tempters and Tempted*, published by Thomas Butler, Bookseller, also of Ventnor, and seems to have been freely distributed, at first, around Newport.

*I have yet to track down a copy of this work.*

It's contents were explosive, and provoked the Mayor of Newport, John Henry Hearn,, Esq., to speak out about it, at a council meeting of Tuesday, February 4th, 1856.

```{admonition} Report in *Isle of Wight Mercury*, Saturday 09 February 1856
:class: dropdown
[Isle of Wight Mercury - Saturday 09 February 1856](https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001417/18560209/015/0005)

The Mayor rose, and said, that he should not be doing justice to his own feelings or to the town if he did not bring before the Council the grows insult which had been cast on them by the address, the Tempter and Tempted, written, it was said, by a gentleman lately come to reside there, the Rev. Carus Wilson, and it was with no ordinary feelings of indignation that he found the beastly tract had been taken to his house, and was in the hands of his family and female domestics; could any honest man, could any father of a family avoid feeling grieved that such gross accounts of vice should be brought to defile the minds of young persons? He was more astonished and indignant to find that copies had been delivered to the children at the Sunday schools, and the National schools. He hoped the British schools had escaped the pollution. He considered these females who distributed such a work and placed them in the hands of children a disgrace to their sex. He regretted that these meddling troublesome fellows who were interfering where they had no connection with the town, and he should have thought that Mr. Smith might have found other ditties for which he was paid by the Treasury, rather than interfering with the town of Newport. He felt it his duty to deny most clearly, and to protest most strongly against the falsehoods and calumnies which had been circulated respecting the Borough of Newport. He asserted firmly, and would prove his assertion that there were few more moral towns than Newport and no garrison town where there was so little debauchment. He could prove by official returns which he had obtained, that the health of the soldiers their general morality, while at Parkhurst, were much above the average. He could not have allowed the Council to have separated without throwing off the foul imputation, and pressing from his heart the indignation he felt at the insult that had been put on them, and the town.—Mr. W. B. Mew concurred in the sentiments and feelings expressed by the Mayor, and denounced the exaggerated statements about the town, which haul been put forth.—Mr. Robert Pinnock congratulated the Council on the course taken by the Mayor, to revel the calumnies which had been indulged in thousands of the books, had been circulated, and unless contradicted, might cling to the town. He asked the Mayor whether he would take it up as the organ of the Council, & repudiate the calumnious attack on the town. Its origin could be traced to a new movement that had been organized in the memorial addressed to the Magistrates, and to a newspaper paragraph. He considered that the sooner such proceedings were discouraged the better.—Mr. Pring said the memorial had been handed to the Watch Committee, of which he was one, and after the strictest investigation, they came to an unanimous vote, that there was no cause to interfere with tie general arrangements. He had lately been in most of the towns in the kingdom where the military were near, and he said with confidence, that Newport for order, quietness and morality, surpassed all the others. Some persons were over nice, and he thought the Town Clerk might as will stay at home, as to go about interfering with others.—Mr. Eldridge (Town Clerk), said he was one of those who agreed with the memorial; he thought it was quite right, and no censure ought to be cast on those who were parties to it. The attention of the Magistrates was called to facts which were patent to all Gentlemen, and if those present had seen the report of the Town Missionary, which Dr. Wavell and himself had presented to them weekly, they would know the amount of vice which prevailed.—The Mayor said they had no right to sit in judgment upon others, they had no authority to judge and collect accusations against their neighbours. If this was the occupation of a Town Missionary, the sooner he was removed the better.—Mr. Eldridge said he knew that he had lifted up many who had been cast down, and he could tell of those in higher places, whose conduct would not bear investigation.—Mr. Pinnock said that the missionary was engaged to raise up the frail, but the course pursued by him and his employers, had turned out a curse to the town.—Mr. Wilkins and Mr. Morgan expressed similar feelings with the other members of the Council.—Mr. W. B. Mew wished to know by what authority these men had set up this court of inquisition; he felt indignant at their presumption. There was a newspaper once circulated in the town, called Paul Pry, which was very objectionable, and caused unpleasantness in many families but this was much worse, as the scandal was handed from one to the other, without the knowledge of the person whose reputation was attacked. If this Paul Pry defended by Mr. Eldridge, went into these abodes of sin and temptation, he ought to be exceedingly good; as pitch could not be handled without defilement. The exposure that day should induce the Town Clerk to cut such acquaintance, and he could not help feeling disgusted that men should be found, who could listen to the reports, full of scandals and libels on their neighbours.—The Mayor said he was afraid there was a great deal too much of spying and prying going on. After a long conversation, it was determined that it should be left to the Mayor either to write in his own name to the Rev. Carus Wilson or in that of the Council contradicting his statements, as embodied in the address "Tempters and Tempted." Since the meeting of the Town Council and the exposure of the system of espionage which has been carried on in Newport, principally by the means of the town missionary, Mr. Tucker, several subscribers have determined to have their names struck as they never contemplated that they were paying their money to gratify the curiosity of individuals, or to rake up scandal against their neighbours.
```

```{admontition} Reported in *Hampshire Telegraph*, Saturday 09 February 1856
:class: dropdown
[Hampshire Telegraph - Saturday 09 February 1856](https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000069/18560209/013/0004)

MEETING OF THE NEWPORT TOWN COUNCIL.

The Quarterly Meeting of the Town Council was held on Tuesday, the Mayor, John Henry Hearn,, Esq., in the chair.

...

The Mayor— I should not do justice to my own feelings or my duty to the town, if I were not to bring, before this Council the insult which had been offered by the publication of the "Tempters and Tempted." It was with no ordinary feelings of indignation that I found the beastly tract had been thrust into my house, and copies were in the hands of my family and female servants. I was still more astonished to find that they had been delivered to the children of the Sunday and National Schools; the British Schools I hope escaped the pollution ; and for such books to be placed in the hands of children by females I consider it a disgrace to their sex. There were meddling, troublesome fellows who interfered where they had no right, having no connection with the town. I should think that Mr. Smith could find plenty of duties at Parkhurst Prison, for which he is paid by the Treasury, instead of mixing himself up in these transactions. There was no doubt it was the work of a Mr. Wilson, a gentleman who had taken up a temporary residence in the Island, but a good deal of it must have been supplied by others. I again deny the accusation, and protest against the slander. With so many soldiers in the neighbourhood, perfection could not be expected ; but with perfect confidence I assert that in no garrison town in the kingdom was there so little debauchery ; and from information he had obtained from an official quarter, the health and morals of the troops at Parkhurst were above the average of other places. I cannot help expressing to this Council the strong feelings I entertain at the foul indignity that has been put on us as a town.

Mr. Pinnock congratulated the Council on the bold manner in which the Mayor had met the foul accusation, which had been circulated ; and which, uncontradicted, might prove an injury to the town. Thousands of copies had been issued, and he had heard that more were to be sent abroad. He traced the scandal to the new movement that had been organised in Newport, to the committee and memorial afterwards published in the newspapers, and considered it the duty of all to discourage such proceedings.

Mr. Pring, as one of the Watch Committee, said, the memorial had been handed to them, and its contents discussed, and they came to an unanimous vote that there it was no just ground for interference. He had travelled much, seen many places where soldiers were near, and fearlessly affirmed that a quieter or better conducted town was not to be found in the kingdom. Some persons were over nice and expected perfection, and he thought it would be quite as well if their Town Clerk were to stay at home as go about interfering with others.

Mr Eldridge (Town Clerk), rose and said, he was one of those who agreed with the memorial ; the memorialists did not intend it as a censure, but called the attention of the magistrates to a fact patent to all. He had nothing to do with the "Tempters and Tempted," but if gentlemen had seen the lists brought to him and Dr. Wavell weekly, they would be astonished at the amount of crime and the persons committing it; he could name some of the higher classes.— (Great sensation.)

The Mayor said they had no right to sit in judgement on their neighbours ; such conduct was indeent, and he held those who stirred in such things as ecxeeding their duty. Persons slandered had not the ordinary means of defence, and if that was the office of the missionary it was using it for evil.

Mr. Eidmidge said the missionary had raised up many bowed down with sin.

Mr. Pinnock thought if the missionary was engaged to raise up the frail it was not intended that he should be a spy ; it would be found that he was a curse to the town.

Mr. Wilkins and Mr. Morgan expressed opinions in unison with the other members of the Council.

Mr. W. B. Mew would like to know by what authority Dr. Wavell and Mr. Eldridge set themselves up as inquisitors on others ; such conduct raised the indignation of every one worthy the name of man. This missionary was worse than the Paul Pry Newspaper; there you could find out what was said, but this was a private inquisitor. How he could go amongst such vice as he descriibed without contamination he could not think, for it was difficult to handle pitch without being defliled. He was surprisd at the Town Clerk ; he would advise him to break off such acquaintance as early as possible.

After a desultory conversation it was agreed that the Mayor be empowered to write to the Rev. Carus Wilson, either in his own name or that of the Council, repudiating the description he had given of the Town of Newport in his tract, "The Tempters and Tempted."

---
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000494/18560209/049/0007
Hampshire Advertiser - Saturday 09 February 1856

NEWPORT, Saturday, February 9.

Town Council Meeting

The quarterly meeting of the Newport Town Council took place on Tuesday.

...

The Reported Immoral State of the Inhabitants of Newport

The Worshipful the Mayor rose and said, there was one painful matter affecting the interests of the town which he considered it his duty, as their chief Magistrate, to bring before the Council. His feelings had been lately shocked on finding that a disgusting pamphlet, entitled, "Tempters and Tempted," had been industriously circulated about the town, and by one means and the other had found its way into almost every house ; and he was sure he was sharing the feelings of every, rightminded head of a household, when he said that such vile slander against their town as was therein contained ought to be emphatically and publicly protested against— (hear, bear). He could not express the indignation he felt on learning its contents, and finding that everyone in his house, excepting his wife, had read its contaminating pages; and greatly astonished was he to find that those tracts had been placed in the hands of the children of their Church Sunday and other schools by females— he would not say by ladies. He would ask if expressions such as these— "Your town is on fire with the flames of licentiousness and lust" — were fit for the minds of tender children to dwell upon? And were they not a gross insult, and a libel on the inhabitants of the town ? And by whom was this shameful tract written? Not by one of the pastors or ministers of the town, but by a non-resident, who had nothing whatever to do with the town, assisted by another meddling, troublesome busybody, who, he should think, would be far better employed in his business at the Prison at Parkhurst. The parties to the tract were Carus Wilson and Henry Smith; that was an undisguised fact, and the stigma with which the town had been branded would doubtless be most pernicious to the interests of it ; and he did say they (the Corporation) ought to do all in their power to destroy its baneful influence. The assertions in it respecting the general depravity and debauchery of our town were infamously false. There was not a garrison town in England that was so free from the charge as Newport— (hear, hear), and he had it from undoubted authority that there had always been less average disease in the Garrison at Parkhurst than at any other, arising from such vicious habits as are imputed to our town. He would, therefore, once again say, that these infamous and unfounded assertions respecting their borough ought to be thus publicly denounced— (hear, hear).

Mr. Pinnock said he was proud their Chief Magistrate had shown the moral courage thus to speak out against a matter which ciations than the Mayor had, and desire him to take such further was calculated to be a most serious injury to the town, if not thus publicly disclaimed. And they ought to go further in their denun- steps as be might deem expedient to stop the thing— (hear). For such a false and shocking report of the state of morals of the inhabitants of Newport was unjust to the Magistracy of the Borough, and he regretted to be obliged to further state that some of the members of their Council had been, in a measure, parties to it. They first had their attention drawn to the immoral state of the town by their Town Clerk, some of the ministers of religion, and other parties living in the town, waiting on the Magistrates, at the Town Hall, as a deputation, requesting them to lend their influence, in their public capacity, to suppress vice and immorality in the town; then there were paragraphs in the newspapers on the subject; and at last there were found religious fanatics ready to make a handle of those pharisaical " good intentions," and scandal was the consequence, which if not met in some such way as this, the town was likely to suffer most seriously. He had some knowledge of other military towns, and it was with thankfulness he felt that Newport was a paradise in comparison with any of them.

Mr. W. B. Mew fully coincided in the censures which bad been passed on the authors and circulators of this most injudicious and injurious tract.

Mr. Pring considered at the time that the said deputation took upon themselves to wait upon the Council and lecture them upon the immoral state of the town, that they were going somewhat out of their way, and could not help thinking that their worthy Town Clerk, who headed that deputation, would have been better employed in his office. However, they thought perhaps there were some matters which might be rectified, and instructed their police to be watchful and keep the streets clear, and people moving; and their inspector had shown that generally speaking there was no necessity for interference except on Sundays, and then it was a delicate matter, as people stood about talking with each other after coming out of the various places of worship. Well, the police, in the execution of their duty, civilly requested a group, who were thus standing together in the High-street, to " move on," and they turned out to be a tradesman's family, who had since been to them complaining of the impertinence of the police in this respect. He had opportunities of being acquainted with the state of other military towns, and he could say with Mr. Pinnock, that Newport was not to be compared with any of them. Take Portsmouth, Winchester, Chatham, or even the fashionable town of Southampton, and immorality exhibited itself in a much greater degree in those towns than in Newport— (hear).

The Town Clerk (Mr. Eldridge) replied, that as far as the memorial which had been spoken of went, he believed he and the other parties connected with that movement had acted with perfect consistency, and had done nothing in it but what was proper. Their attention had been drawn to the retrograding state of the public morals of Newport, and they were anxious to use every exertion legally to stem the growing depravity of the town— which was patent to all. With respect to the tract in question, he had read it, and thought it a very injudicious publication, and feeling this, when their town missionary spoke to him respecting some which he had for circulation, he told him it would be unwise to do so, and that he had best not have anything to do with it. But, nevertheless, he thought the less said about the matter the better. He and Dr. Wavell had the weekly inspection of the Town Missionary's report book, and they unhappily knew that many moving in the higher ranks of life were guilty of fostering the immorality of the town by their own immoral conduct —(great excitement, and cries of "Order" from both sides of the Chamber).

The Chairman must call Mr. Eldridge to order. Such Observations were in very bad taste and most improper, and they could not be heard sitting there in judgment on their fellow-townsmen ; and he was surprised and vexed to learn that such a spy system had been adopted of diving into matters of privacy, for the purpose of getting up a Quixotic crusade against an evil which, by parties thus acting with such indiscreet religious zeal, would be the very means of increasing the evils they would wish to suppress. The utmost they could do was to put down dancing- houses and brothels, prevent broils and lewd and improper conduct in the streets, and keep public-houses as orderly as possible. Beyond this they could not go— (hear).

Mr. Pring to Mr. Eldridge— And by what means and authority do you and Dr. Wavell get the regular inspection of this Town Missionary's Report-book?

Mr. Pinnock— And if this is his mission, the sooner he is out of the town the better. Such a man is a curse to the town !

Mr. Eldridge— Not a curse. A blessing, I hope. His book is strictly private. No one but Dr. Wavell and myself, who sign it weekly, see the book.

Mr. Morris Morgan— It has been said that the Town Missionary had been told not to circulate the tract ; but he had reasons for believing that he did distributed them, and he had been informed that he had also given certain information to Carus Wilson on the subject— (exclamations of "Oh !")

Mr. Mew was astounded at what had been elicited during this discussion, and expressed himself in the most severe terms of disapprobation at the idea of some of the authorities of the town being so mixed up with such a disreputable matter— and they, too, professing themselves to be Christians ! Such conduct was scandalous and abominable, and was only second in infamy to the Paul Pry newspaper espionage that was some years ago the medium of so much scandal and abuse, and had such a baneful effect on society. He thought if Mr. Eldridge felt rightly on the matter, he would at once cut the acquaintance of this Town Missionary, at least.

After some further stormy observations— many of the Council joining in the discussion—it was agreed that the Mayor should take what steps he might consider necessary as a still further disclaimer to the false and injurious reports which had been so industriously circulated concerning the reputation of their borough ; and the Council broke up with anything but delighted feelings.


---
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000494/18560223/002/0008
Hampshire Advertiser - Saturday 23 February 1856

Just Published

A LETTER TO THE MAYOR OF NEWPORT, in Reply to his Letter of Remonstrances regarding the Tract, entitled "Tempters and Tempted," by the Rev. CARUS WILSON. Price 2d. each, or 12 copies free by post, 2s.

"Whether it be right in the sight of God to hearken unto you more than God, judge ye. For we cannot but speak the things which we have seen and heard."—Acts iv., 19, 20.

Also, TEMPTERS AND TEMPTED, a Tract, by the Rev. W CARUS WILSON. Price 1d, or 12 copies free by post, 2s. Published by Thomas Butler, Bookseller, Ventnor, Isle of Wight ; and Sold by Batchelor, Bookseller, Portsmouth; Sharland, Southampton ; Wayland, Ryde ; Pinhorn, Cowes ; and by all Booksellers at Newport.


---
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001417/18560301/027/0005
Isle of Wight Mercury - Saturday 01 March 1856

BOROUGH PETTY SESSIONS, Monday Feb. 25

Before J. H. Hearn Esq. (Mayor), Thomas Cooke and Edward Way, Esqrs.

James Lewis, alias Nobby Ducks, who had been taken into custody on Saturday evening, for selling the letter of the Rev. W. Carus Wilson, in answer to one sent him by the Mayor of Newport, respecting the tract "the Tempters and Tempted," appeared in court. The defendant had been liberated on his own bail, and retained Mr. George Prince Joyce as his legal adviser. It was told on his appearing in the box that there war charge against then put several questions to the Bench, but was answered that his client was discharged. He applied for an order for the restitution of the pamphlets, and was referred to the inspector of Police.

COUNTY POLICE

Libel Case.— An extraordinary meeting of the County Magistrates was held on Monday, at the Guildhall, to hear the charge made by Mr. Francis Pittis, of Newport, against the Rey. W. Carus Wilson, for having written a false and scandalous libel on his character. The court-room and gallery were crowded with persons of interest of the Town, and other parts of the Island. The Bench consisted of the Hon. a'Court Holmes (chairman), Sir John Simeon, Bart., Capt. Kerr, Capt. Brigstocke, Thomas Cooke. and J. A. Hambrough, Esqrs.

Mr. Eldridge appeared for the prosecutor, and Mr. Ford for the defendant. The latter handed in a Medical Certificate that the health of the defendant would not allow of his appearing that day. The case proceeded without his presence. Mr. Eldridge observed that it had been said a good name was a man's best inheritance, it certainly was above all earthly treasure. He was bound to say, his client had the respect of all who knew him, and he must say that the high and honourable position which Mr. Pittis holds, as Alderman of the Borough, makes him careful of not allowing even shadows to be cast on his reputation. In a certain tract, imputations are thrown on his character, and although he feels free front all aspersions, he could not allow them to pass, whether intended or not, without a public denial of their application. He believed they were not intended, but that the defendant, with great zeal, had exceeded his duty ; for when a man steps out of his way, on the delicate ground of private character, he must treat the subject in a delicate manner, and not rush hastily to commit wrong; because he might think there was some good in the distance. No one who reads the tract and pamphlet, can doubt that they reflect seriously on the character of the town, and on individuals; it is not simply a degree of bitterness, but there are the most unwarranted innondoes. He did not stand as an apologist for vice; but it was a most unfortunate circumstance, that when a memorial had been presented to the magistrates which they admitted would check crime and immorality, that these works should have been brought out. He admitted there was much evil, and when he had the honour of filling the office of first magistrate, he, like those in office now, could only deal with cases brought before him. There were cases of gross immoral houses always complained of, by parties, who would never come forward to prove the cases within their own observation. Plain allusions had been made in the pamphlet to the Town Clerk,—he would say, that his observations in the council were misunderstood and misreported. He was sensible of the evils in the Town, and with others had endeavoured to diminish the amount. A certain journal came before him, but only shewing the operations of the society. It did not refer to any member in the council, or to any one in authority; it was merely a record of the poor persons who had been visited. An apology of an ample character having been given completely satisfactory, Mr. Pittis felt he had done his duty to himself, and wished to show he had no vindictive motives.

A letter was then brought forward and read.

Mr. Ford said he represented Mr. Wilson, and he regretted that of the observations made by Mr. Eldridge, would compel him to say more than he had intended, which was simply to offer the fullest apology and explanation to Mr. Pittis. Mr. Eldridge had shown that Mr. Wilson was fully justified in the course he had taken, by the admissions made by himself: on the part of Mr. Wilson he was instructed to say, that that gentleman had the fullest confidence in the integrity and strict morality of Mr. Pittis, and that the quotation from the letter of a friend at Bristol, although one or two circumstances appeared to correspond, had no reference to him, and he begged again to say that there was no imputation intended to be conveyed, and read the letter purporting to be one from Bristol.— Mr. Ford said that if there should be a republication, the passage affecting Mr. Pittis should be taken out.— Mr. Hearn attempted to express his dissent from the course adopted, but was stopped by Mr. Ford, who said that he and the bench had only to do with Mr. Pittis, it was quite irregular.—The chairman after a consultation, said, that as the case had been compromised, they were of opinion that Mr. Hearn should not be heard. Others were affected besides Mr. Pittis.— Mr. Hearn said that others were implicated in the charges, and the apology was made to them, he would not be precluded from taking proceedings in another place.— Mr. Eldridge observed that Mr. Pittis felt that after this ample apology, he should not be acting as a man or a Christian to press the case.— The chairman said that the course pursued was very creditable to both parties. Mr. Pittis very properly came forward to vindicate his character from the vile suspicion. With regard to the pamphlet, every one must see that it was intended for Mr. Pittis, but no one would believe it of him. He hoped Mr. Wilson's friends would advise him better than to re-issue the tracts. He could not perhaps control his zeal, but he hoped he would not use it in such an uncalled for way. He was sorry that Mr. Pittis should have had occasion to appear that day. Mr. Wilson said the quotation did not apply to Mr. Pittis, and they were bound to believe him.


---

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001417/18560301/004/0001
Isle of Wight Mercury - Saturday 01 March 1856

JUST PUBLISHED.

A LETTER TO THE MAYOR OF NEWPORT, in Reply to his Letter of Remonstrances regarding the Tract, entitled "Tempters and Tempted," by the Rev. CARUS WILSON. Price 2d. each, or 12 copies free by post, 2s.

"Whether it be right in the sight of God to hearken unto you more than God, judge thee. For we cannot but speak the things which we have seen and heard."—Acts iv., 19, 20.

Also, TEMPTERS AND TEMPTED, a Tract, by the Rev. W CARUS WILSON. Price 1d, or 12 copies free by post, 2s. Published by Thomas Butler, Bookseller, Ventnor, Isle of Wight ; and Sold by Batchelor, Bookseller, Portsmouth; Sharland, Southampton ; Wayland, Ryde ; Pinhorn, Cowes ; and by all Booksellers at Newport.


---
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000494/18560301/045/0007
Hampshire Advertiser - Saturday 01 March 1856

BOROUGH COURT. Monday.— Magistrates present: The Mayor, and Thomas Cooke, esq.

"Tempters and Tempted."— James Lewis, a second jand dealer, appeared to answer a summons, for publicly hawking and selling the pamphlet addressed to the Mayor of Newport by the Rev. William Carus Wilson, notwithstanding the public caution which had been placarded by James Eldridge, esq., to the effect that it was libellous; but no one appearing to prosecute, the Mayor informed him that he was discharged. He, however, looked imploringly on the Bench, with the apparent feeling of a martyr, respecting certain sequestered property in the possession of the Inspector of Police, in the shape of a bundle of tracts of which he had been relieved when taken to the Station-house on Saturday ; and George Prince Joyce, esq., who appeared as his legal adviser, respectfully informed the bench, that unless they were immediately restored to his client, he would bring an action against the Magistrates. The Mayor said the defendant might apply to the Inspector, who could use own discretion in the matter.


---
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/BL/0001417/18560301/025/0003?browse=true
Isle of Wight Mercury - Saturday 01 March 1856

`[Editorial]`

The immorality existing in our large towns is a matter of serious import. It is a question that requires patient investigation. It is an evil that demands a speedy but powerful remedy. The fastidiousness of a falsely-delicate Age may indeed ignore the existence of the evil, or, while admitting ita existence, may seek to keep it out of sight ;—but, unhappily, it has grown—it is growing—to such dimensions that so tender a mode of dealing with it is as absurd as it is criminal. We have no patience with that tender modesty which is offended by the exposure of a great vice. We mistrust the delicacy that is so very readily shocked—the morality that shrinks from dealing with a fearful guilt. What should we say of the physician who denied the existence of a festering wound because he dared not attempt to heal it? What then, is the position of those who seek to shroud in vice the darkness of a willing ignorance, because they are unable to grapple with it?

Our attention has been directed to a remarkable controversy between the representatives of a large town on the one hand, and a servant of the Church of England on the other. We have refrained from entering into a discussion of its causes or results, until the whole question was fairly before us. We have now, however, given our most serious attention to the matter: and though we are conscious that the deliberate expression of our opinion will expose us to considerable obloquy, we are not disposed to shrink from what we conceive to be our duty as public Journalists. We have humbly attempted, in the discharge of our Editorial labours, to call the attention of our Readers to various social evils that seemed to us worthy of patient consideration; we cannot, therefore, refuse to record our opinion in a matter that is of vital importance to the welfare of Society.

The Rev. W. Carus WILSON, M.A.,—a gentleman whose position renders impossible the imputation of an interested motive—struck with the profligacy patent to all who have eyes to see and ears to hear in the streets of Newport,—as in the streets of every populous town— addressed a brief and earnest remonstrance on the subject to its inhabitants. In this remonstrance, entitled "Tempters and Tempted," he probed with a firm hand, the deadly wound. He stated there some facts of a harrowing nature, whose counterparts, alas ! are not unknown to those who have had their attention directed to this subject. In eloquent, in burning words, he drew a picture of the sad condition both of the Tempter and the Tempted. He alluded to the causes of this wholesale immorality. He made an affectionate appeal to those " in high places," to endeavour to check the growth of this terrible evil. Shortly after the circulation of this impressive Address, the Mayor of Newport brought it under the consideration of his Town Council. Well, what then ? Of course, our Readers will say, the Mayor and his fellow-townsmen appreciated the generous charity of Mr. Wilson, and they determined to adopt, if possible, some remedial measures. —For observe, Mr. WILSON did not at first say the town of Newport was worse than any other town, or, at least, any town in the neighbourhood of large Barracks. The evil is notoriously not confined to Newport ; but Newport alone fell within the sphere of Mr. WILSON'S ministrations.—But the Mayor, in a most vehement denunciation of " meddlers ;" a majority of the Town Council in speeches marked by an utter want of reverence for Mr. WILSON'S sacred office, denounced his Tract as " beastly !" Now, we have carefully perused it, and are not afraid to say—it contains nothing that could shock the most refined delicacy ! However, these gentlemen distinguished themselves by a warm rivalry in the employment of the most violent phrases. As for immorality—who ever heard of it in Newport? Who ever saw a drunkard ? Who ever had his eyes polluted by disgusting sights, or his ears profaned by oaths and obscene expressions? Vice? how should it enter into those sacred precincts which a Mayor and a Town Council watch over ?

Now is it wise—this attempt to cover up a deformity, to slur over an evil ? Is it not better to grapple with a difficulty than simply to shut one's eyes and deny its existence? Why, the existence of those vices to which Mr. Wilson alluded is notorious. They are gradually undermining our national character. They menace the national prosperity. They flaunt in the open thoroughfares. They force themselves upon the observation of our sisters, our children, our wives. What are we to do then ? To meet in solemn conclave and resolutely ignore them ? To heap abuse and obloquy on the head of any zealous-minded, true-hearted man who bares the evil to our unwilling eyes? No: it is the duty, the privilege—would it were the boast!—of those who sit "in the high places," who administer the affairs of a large town, to devise some remedial measures. We do not say that these horrid iniquities can be utterly rooted out. We know that the Golden Age is yet far distant. But undoubtedly much may be done. By removing Temptation. we may check the increase of Crime. We wish however to guard ourselves from any imputation against individuals. The character of gentleman like Messrs. Hearn and Pittis is, as it should be above suspicion.

Inhabitants of Newport ! are you all as easily shocked as the members of your Town Council? Do you in truth, or do the majority of you, approve of their attempt "to burke " the Ministers of Religion ? Do you not rather believe that Mr. Wilson deserves your warm gratitude, your earnest sympathy, for the effort he has made to " make a suushine in a shady place ?" Parents who have daughters, brothers who have sisters, owe their heartiest thanks to Mr. Wilson.

We trust, above all, that the Clergy of Newport— nay, the Clergy of the whole Island— will make common cause with Mr. Wilson, and support him in his brave opposition to Falsehood, Immorality and Slander. We know that they feel deeply the importance of the question. We know that they sorrow over the magnitude of the evil with which he has dared to grapple. We believe that they will therefore gladly come forward and support him with their countenance, their encouragement and their exertions.

For our own part, we hold that "that to the pure all things are pure." We hold that the mind is never contaminated by the exposure of a great vice, or the pourtrayal of its terrible consequences. If, indeed our streets were free from pollution—if it were possible to bring up our sisters or our daughters so that they should be ignorant of the existence of the drunkard or the children of shame—if their ears could be shut, their eyes closed against the sights and sounds of vice—it might he unwise to force upon their notice evils of which they were happily ignorant. But the drunkard reels through the open street. The shameless woman pours out her curses in the public places. So let us warn those who see the effects, the dread results of Vice against the subtle approaches and insidious allurements of Temptation. Let us look upon these evils as deformities which stand out in all their horror in the very noonday sun. Let us grapple with them by providing for the ignorant wholesome knowledge, for the weary innocent recreation, for the young safe shelter from the foes of Truth and God. Let us build up Schools in the stead of Beershops. Let us each in his individual sphere diffuse the blessing of a good example. Let us teach the Lower Classes the value of purity of mind, thought, of speech. Let us train up the Boys of our Towns and Villages to reverence decency, and shun the profane word, the obscene jest. Let us aid one another in charity and good works, and welcome the truthful words of those who—like the Rev. W. Carus Wilson—are not afraid to bare to the light the wounds of the Social body, in defiance even of Mayors and Town Councillors!

---