# In *Cuckold's Chronicle*

https://quod.lib.umich.edu/cgi/t/text/text-idx?cc=evans;c=evans;idno=N25328.0001.001;rgn=div2;view=text;node=N25328.0001.001:4.1

"The Cuckold's chronicle: being select trials for adultry [sic], incest, imbecility, ravishment, &c. : Volume I." In the digital collection Evans Early American Imprint Collection. https://name.umdl.umich.edu/N25328.0001.001.

The Trial between the Right Hon. Sir Richard Worsley, Bart, and George Maurice Bissett, Esq. Defendant, for Criminal Conversation with the Plaintiff's Wife, on Thursday 21st of Feb. 1782,
THIS Trial, not more celebrated in the annals of gallantry, than in the records of judicial proceeding; quoted alike by the gay amateurs of dissipated pleasure, and the sedulous investigator of legal business, we have chosen for the opening of these interesting Memoirs. The volatile indifference of this modern Messalina, the despicable meanness of her wretched Husband, and the evidence of her Gallants, now directly pointed, and now curiously evasive, furnish a source of such mingled amusement and instruction, as few instances possess the power of surpassing, or indeed of equalling.

This cause was tried before the Right Honourable William, Earl of Mansfield, and a Special Jury.

For the Plaintiff, the Counsel were,  
Mr. Attorney General,  
Mr. Dunning,  
Mr. Lee,  
Mr. Erskine.

For the Defendant,
Mr. Bearcrost,  
Mr. Pechell,  
Mr. Howorth.

The Declaration stated, that the defendant, on the 19th of November, 1781, and at other times between that day and the 24th of the same month, at Westminster, in the county of Middlesex; with force and arms, made an assault on Seymour, the wife of the plaintiff, and then and there debauched, deslowered, lay with and carnally was connected with her, the said Seymour, to the plaintiff's damage of 20,000l.

To this declaration the defendant pleaded not guilty, and thereupon issue was joined.

The cause was opened by Mr. Attorney General, who stated, that the plaintiff lived at Apuldurcomb, in the Isle of Wight, and was worth about 5000l. a year; that Lady Worsley was the daughter of Sir John Fleming, and that Sir Richard had a fortune of about 70,000l. or more with her: the plaintiff and she were married on the 15th of September 1775, and had issue two children, a son and a daughter, that the defendant was an officer in the Hampshire Militia, of which the plaintiff was Colonel, and that their acquaintance had been only from the end of February, or commencement of March, 1781; and that it originated in consequence of a burgage tenure Mr. Bisset possessed in the Isle of Wight, and which, added to an estate of 800l. a year in Somersetshire. made his income about 1500l. a year; this burgage-tenure, Sir Richard, impelled by parliamentary motives, wished to purchase: this occasioned their first meeting, 〈◊〉 soon afterwards Sir Richard gave Mr. Bisset a commission in his regiment. That the greatest intimacy now took place between them: the plaintiff had a house at Maidstone, and the defendant, while at camp in Coxheath, regularly visited him there. That after the breaking up of the camp, they came to Lewes, where Sir Richard had a house; and Mr. Bissett lodgings; and the greatest friendship subsisted between them, till that unhappy event, the ground work of this action, took place.

After this opening, the evidence for the plaintiff was brought forwards. The marriage of the 15th of September 1775, was admitted. Captain Leversage, an officer in the Hampshire Militia, and an acquaintance and neighbour of Sir Richard's, declared, that he had no knowledge of Captain Bissett, previous to his seeing him on the parade a• High Wickham, after his receiving his commission from Sir Richard; that he recollected Sir Richard Worsley and Captain Bissett's being at Coxheath together: and that there seemed to be the greatest intimacy between Sir Richard and his Family, and him; Mr. Bissett, Captain Leversage said, seemed to him a man of fashion, and extensive intimacy with the brighter circle of society. At the breaking up of the camp, he came with Sir Richard's family to Lewes, and visited also at Maidstone. Mr. Bissett had lodgings at Lewes, and was frequently at Sir Richard's house there. On Sunday the 18th of November, Lady Worsley drank tea and supped at the house of Captain Leversage, at Lewes, on the invitation of the Captain and his family; Captain Bissett came with her. Sir Richard Worsley did not come in pursuance of the invitation, but about ten o'clock in the evening, sent an apology by Captain Worsley, that he was not well and wished to be excused; that he could not attend that evening, and was then taking some sack whey for his indisposition.

This invitation to Captain Leversage's house was general: married ladies, as well as their husbands, being invited. Lady Worsley came about seven o'clock in the evening. This friendly assembly, Lady Worsley was the first who attempted to break up: she intimated a desire to part between twelve and one o'clock. Mrs. Leversage was apprehensive, that the company was not perfectly agreeable to her, by her eagerness to go, and wished her not to urge her departure; Lady Worsley sat down again, and Captain Bissett looking at his watch, and addressing himself to her Ladyship, said, Don't go yet; upon this she staid till a quarter past one.

On their departure, Captain Leversage took a light, intending to accompany them home, Sir Richard's house being nearly opposite; he went within a few yards of the door, when Captain Bissett begged he would not give himself any further trouble; on this, Captain Leversage wishing them a good night, returned home. About four or five o'clock in the morning, he was awaked by a violent rapping at his door: he arose directly, and going to the window, found it was one of Sir Richard's servants, who brought his master's compliments, and a polite message, desiring Lady Worsley would come home; the Captain told him Lady Worsley had been gone ever since one o'clock: in about ten minutes or a quarter of an hour, Sir Richard himself appears; Leversage, says he where is Lady Worsley?

When Captain Leversage came to this occurrence, the Attorney-General, actuated, no doubt by a laudable zeal for his client's interest, stopt him, and after asking one or two questions not very material, left him to the cross-examination of Mr. Bearcroft, from which as little remarkable occurred.

A Mr. Sadler proved the hand writing of Captain Bissett, in two letters; the first evinced the friendly intercourse which subsisted between the plaintiff and the defendant; it congratulated Sir Richard on his Lady's happy delivery of a daughter, and expressed the writer's great anxiety for Lady Worsley's health, and his earnest desire for her return to quarters: the second letter was wrote the morning of the elopement; inclosed the Captain's commission, which Sir Richard was desired to accept, and named Lord Deerhurst's Cleaveland Row, as the place where an answer would be expected.

Francis Godfrey, a servant of Sir Richard Worsley's remembered Lady Worsley's going to Captain Leversage's; she told him at going out, that if any body called for her, she should not sup at home that evening: he sat up for her till between five and six o'clock in the morning; about five Sir Richard called him, and sent him to Captain Leversage's; Sir Richard, he said, appeared to be much disturbed; after repeated enquiries after Lady Worsley, he was told that she had left Captain Leversage's at one in the morning, accompanied by Captain Bissett. This man had only lived with Sir Richard one day.

Mr. Stubbs, the landlord of the house where Captain Bissett lodged, did not remember his coming home on this memorable morning; but between three and four, the Captain knocked at his chamber door, and begged to light a candle; in this he was accommodated: he was then in his bed-gown, and directly returned to his room; in a short time he came out of his room and called the servant, Conolly, and begged him to go down stairs; in a little time he called the man again, and then the man or some other person went out of the door; in about ten minutes the sash was thrown up. Mr. Stubbs go out of bed to know if the Captain wanted any thing, but was answered in the negative: soon after the person, whoever it was, came in again, and just afterwards a chaise arrived at the door: it did not, however, stop, but went on to turn about, and some time after, the Captain and some other person went down stairs, and the chaise drove off.

Mr. Attorney-General questioned what the time might be, but Lord Mansfield remarked. this is nothing but travelling a long way about; why don't you come to the point and bring them to London at once?

T. Bourn, the waiter at the Royal Hotel, in Pall Mall, remembered a Lady and gentleman coming there about two in the morning, of the 19th of November; he went to the chaise door, and the Gentleman let the window down about half way; on his attempting to open the door, the gentleman pulled it up again: he stopped a short time, and the window was let down half way again, and as he was opening the door, the window was once more thrown up. Mr. Weston then came to the door, and the Gentleman and lady stepped out; they entered the house very quickly, and was shewn up stairs into a room named the Apollo, a large drawing-room, and they then ordered breakfast directly. The waiter carried breakfast up stairs and prepared a bed for them as near the dining-room as he possibly could, and then, said he, they went to bed.

Lord Mansfield asked, how he knew they went to bed: the waiter's reason for thinking so was, that he went to take the things away, and they had left the dining-room. His Lordship again asked, if he saw them go into the bed-room; to which he was answered, no: what induced the waiter to think they lay together in one bed, he declared, was the plain reason that there was no other bed in the room: they staid at the Hotel four or five days, and during that time passed for man and wife; not that they said any thing importing that they were so, but, knowing no otherwise, he supposed that to be the case.

Ann Watkinson, the house-keeper at the Royal Hotel, knew that the Lady and Gentleman, relative to whom the waiter had sworn, lodged in that house, that their dining-room was called the Apollo, and their bed-chamber No. 14. She was ordered to prepare the bed-room and accordingly did: she never saw them in bed, but she imagined they were, as it was prepared for them; and she also heard them speak in bed: she saw the bed afterward, and was convinced that some person had lain in it. She never heard any conversation between them, and did not know who they were when they came into the house, but had been informed since: when she once went into the room there was a lady there, and she asked Lady Worsley her name, and she answered that her name was Worsley.

Mrs. Commande, who lived at the Royal Hotel, recollected a Lady and Gentleman coming there, on the 19th Novem. and remaining there till the 24th she did not then know them, but had since been acquainted that their names were Lady Worsley and Captain Bisset: they did not assume any name while they remained there nor was she able to observe any thing in their behaviour, which could empower her to judge of the form of their connexion. On the morning they went away, (the 24th) Lady Worsley's name was mentioned; the occasion was, Mrs. Commande introducing two of Sir Richard's servants, a woman and a groom, to Lady Worsley and Mr. Bissett, while they were in bed; shortly afterwards, Captain Bissett sent for her into the dining-room, desired to know her motives for shewing such persons into Lady Worsley's bed-room, and said, such behaviour to ladies of quality would not benefit their house; it was about one o'clock in the morning Mrs. Commande said, when she saw Lady Worsley and Captain Bisset in bed together.

A Mr. Herne only said, that he was the receiver of Mr. Bissett's rents; the amount of which were 800l. or somewhat better than 800l. a year.

This was the whole of the evidence adduced for the plaintiff; several particulars of it, perhaps, afford scope for remark to the curious observer. How auspicious was the commencement of the Friendship between Sir Richard and the Captain! he discovered, no doubt, some kindred virtue in the breast of Mr. Bissett, which attached him by the most congenial sympathy. With the view of having so valued a friend near him, he offers him a commission in that part of the Hampshire Militia, which he himself commands: yet luckier, the Captain entertains as high a regard for Lady Worsley as for his friend; doubtless, at first, a very pure attachment! but then comes this unfortunate invitation to a friend's house, and still more unfortunately at this very crisis, poor Sir Richard finds himself indisposed, and is necessitated to remain at home, nursing himself with sack whey, whilst the scheme of his blackest dishonour is planning; his wife and her lover, tempted by the opportunity, at once forfeit all their claims to virtue, and elope: the romantic attachment of the friends, is in a moment dissolved. Sir Richard, with a patience truly exemplary, waits till five in the morning, and then sends his man to beg his Lady to return home; he comes back with the doleful intelligence, that she has left the house where she supped, some hours, in company with her guardian Captain. Sir Richard is stark raving mad at this news, and immediately repairs to his friend's house; after alarming the whole neighbourhood, he can gain no better tidings▪ but here the prudence of his counsel, the Attorney-General, interrupted Captain Leversage's evidence, and prevented our hearing those effecting bursts of tender anxiety, which must have placed Sir Richard's character in the most amiable point of view; however, let us in pity hope, that the situation of his mind was not so cruelly agonizing, as to have rendered Shakespear's lines applicable to him:

Not Poppy, nor Mandragora, not all the drowsy Syrups of the East,  
Shall medicine thee, to that sweet sleep, which thou had'st yesternight.

We will rather suppose that another potion of that sack whey which unquestionably supported him during the absence of Lady Worsley, restored tranquility to his agitated mind; we cannot even imagine, that his resentment was so bitter, as to induce him to order his servants to penetrate the room where there Lady slept, and thereby give occasion to those pathetic remonstrances, which his friend Captain B. was obliged to make use of to the officious waiting-woman, who so impertinently intruded them into the presence of a lady of quality.

The evidence for the defendant now came forwards; and Mr. Bearcroft, in answer to this evidence, did not attempt to make any defence in controvertion of the charge exhibited against the defendant, but was very ready to admit, that the plaintiff was entitled to a verdict. The only question which then remained was upon the subject of damages; in mitigation of which only he would defend his client; and did not doubt to prove, to the satisfaction of the jury, that Sir Richard not only acquiesced under repeated acts of his own dishonour with various persons, but even excited and encouraged it: on which—

Lord Mansfield said, if a plaintiff encourages, or is privy to, or consenting at all, or contributing to the debauchery of his wife, or joins in it, he ought not to recover a verdict.

Mr. Bearcroft then stated, that he could not only prove this to be the fact, but that he should prove by the affidavits of the woman who attended the bath at Maidstone, that the plaintiff there had absolutely raised the defendant upon his shoulders, to view his naked wife while bathing, and at the same time called to her, saying, Seymour! Seymour! Bisett is looking at you! and that she, on coming out after she had dressed herself, joined the Gentlemen; and they all went off together in a hearty laugh at the transaction which had passed. The bathing-woman was ill, and could not attend the trial herself to give evidence of this fact; but that it had been agreed between the parties, that the attornies on each side should go down to the place for the purpose of taking the affidavits, and in order to view the situation, which they had done, and which affidavits would be read.

That the defendant could not possibly be the father of the child born in August last, as his first acquaintance with the plaintiff commenced only in March; so that he had not bastardized the plaintiff's issue.

He wondered why they had not called some persons belonging to, or about the family, in orderto prove how the parties lived together; a circumstance very material in a case like this: they had only called one person belonging to the family; and that was the butler, who had lived in the house but one day, and who, of course, could not speak to that point.

That the licentious conduct of Lady Worsley, was so notorious, that it had been the subject of common conversation; and that many Ladies of distinction, in the Isle of Wight and elswhere, had frequently remonstrated with Sir Richard on that subject, and told him, that if he did not attempt to restrain her conduct, her character would be ruined and destroyed; that the answer Sir Richard made was, that Lady Worsley liked it, and he chose to do it to oblige her; upon which a very sensible Lady, who had frequently remonstrated with him on the subject, replied,

If this is the case, God help you! you are the most contented—Husband I ever knew:
and that, from the Lady's many prior connections, the idea of seduction by the present defendant was totally done away.

EVIDENCE FOR THE DEFENDANT.

Mary Mariott being unable to attend the trial, the following affidavits were read.

Mary Mariott deposed, that Lady Worsley used to come to the cold bath, near Maidstone, to bathe, and that she used to attend her; that Sir Richard and Mr. Bissett were generally with her; and that the last time she came, which was about noon, in September last, and at the latter end of the hop-season, Sir Richard Worsley and Mr. Bissett staid at the door without, while she bathed; that after she had bathed, she retired into a corner to put on her shift, as Ladies usually do after bathing, and then returned to dress herself, and sat herself down on the seat: that there is a window over the door of the building in which the bath is, and which is the only inle• for light into the bath, and from which any person, who is sitting down on the seat, may be seen, but not when retired into the corner; that when she had almost finished dressing herself, Sir Richard tapped at the door, and said, "Seymour! Seymour! Bissett is going to get up to look at you," or words to that effect; and, looking round, she saw his face at the window; that he continued there about five minuets; that she did not see the plaintiff on the outside, but believes he must help the defendant up; and that after Lady Worsley had dressed herself, she went out, and they were all mery and laughing together: that, excepting this, she never saw any improper conduct or behaviour in the said three persons, unless what is above stated may be thought so.

In addition to this, there was another affidavit read, in which she believed that Mr. Bissett could not have got up to the window, unless he had been assisted by Sir Richard, or stood upon his shoulders; and that Sir Richard might easily have pulled him down if he pleased.

The Right Honourable Lord Deerhurst said, that he was first acquainted with Lady Worsley, in the year 1779: he esteemed her conduct as very dissolute, and thought that conjugal fidelity was not one of her virtues: he was intimate with Sir Richard, but never witnessed any exertions made by him, to check the lewd depravity of her life. His Lordship being on a visit at Sir Richard's house, in the Isle of Wight; Sir Richard seeing Lady Worsley pass by the window, said to Lord Deerhurst, that many young men had assailed her virtue: but that all had proved unsuccessful, and that he gave him full liberty to attempt her chastity, this his Lordship considered as the effect of a light and airy manner; and this Lord Mansfield said, went for nothing. Lord Deerhurst continued at Sir Richard's house ten days; during that time, Sir Richard once found him in the dressing-room adjacent to her Ladyship's bed-chamber, at four o'clock in the morning. Sir Richard pretended amazement at finding him there, and exclaimed, Deerhurst, how came you here? after that his Lordship retired to his bed-chamber; he was, however, suffered to attend Lady Worsley, as if no remarkable occurrence had taken place: he attended her to Southampton, at Kingston and Godalmin, at all these places alone, and with the knowledge of Sir Richard. At Kingston and Godalmin, Lord Deerhurst met her by appointment. Mr. Howarth, one of the defendant's counsel, asked his Lordship, if he was criminally connected with Lady Worsley at the last-mentioned place; but his Lordship claimed the protection of the Judge, and Lord Mansfield decided, that it was a question he had no right to answer. On the cross examination of Mr. Attorney-General, Lord Deerhurst denied any particular permission from Sir Richard to attend Lady Worsley, and said, that other Gentlemen attended her Ladyship, without objection from Sir Richard. His Lordship acknowledged carrying a message from Sir Richard to Lady Worsley at the Hotel, and receiving for answer, that he might inform Sir Richard, that it was in vain for him to attempt the recovery of Lady Worsley, as she was determined never to unite with him again.

The acquaintance of Lord Peterborough with Lady Worsley, commenced nearly about the opening of Ranelagh, in the year 1780: he was first introduced to her at Sadler's Wells, by Lord Deerhurst; he had not any intimacy with Sir Richard, either then or afterwards, nor even spoke to him during his acquaintance with Lady Worsley: he made no remarks on the behaviour of Sir Richard and his Lady, as he never saw them together, but did not think her conduct quite consistent with the character of a decent and virtuous married woman.

Bouchier Smith, Esq. was acquainted with Lady Worsley, in the year 1779; he thought she betrayed a great disregard of character; he was in company with Lady Worsley, on a party at Shooter's Hill, when they met Sir Richard in a phaeton, and her Ladyship many times asked him to accompany them, but he refused, and set off for town; he did not remark any thing else particular that day.

The Marquis of Graham's acquaintance with Lady Worsley, begun four years prior to the trial; he had no intimacy with Sir Richard, he sometimes visited at his house, but not frequently. Lady Worsley was gay, free, and airy, in a manner he thought carried rather too far for a married woman; he did not observe any absolute impropriety or immodesty in her conduct, as far as it respected conversation: to a question which nearly related to himself, the Marquis refused to answer.

A Mr. Clark gave an account of the first interview between Sir Richard Worsley and Mr. Bissett, and the occasion of it.

The Honourable Charles Wyndham's acquaintance with Lady Worsley, commenced between three and four years before the trial: he was not acquainted with Sir Richard at that time, and since his intimacy has been very slight: he never thought the conduct of Lady Worsley becoming; he remembered Lady Worsley's presenting him with a gold-ring in Kensington Gardens.
Doctor Osborn remembered Lady Worsley about August, in the year 1780, at Sir Richard's house in town: being questioned as to the condition he found her in, he replied, 'Between a patient and a physician, there is an implied secrecy; the nature of the case required it, and that being the state of the case I should hardly conceive myself at liberty to declare it; but I have the Lady's permission to give the truth: he said, he was not employed by Sir Richard: being again questioned as to the situation in which he found her, he replied, 'I believe it was never known; at least I never was asked my opinion of the disorder; nor did I think it necessary to mention it, my business was to cure her; and I do not chuse to talk upon the subject, one way or other.' Upon this answer, Lord Mansfield remarked, 'you might have told them when they first interrogated you, that you wished to be excused.'

Here the evidence for the defendant closed. Mr. J. Farrer, the plaintiff's attorney, was brought forwards and sworn on his behalf: he said, he went down to the cold bath mentioned in the affidavit; he saw the place on which Mr. Bissett got to look into the bath, and believed that he might mount it with a great deal of ease, and without the help of Sir Richard; it was about breast high; there was an arm chair placed on the outside; and when he was on the chair, he said, he could raise himself to the window with great facility: the window was about four feet high, and the seat on the outside of the bath.

Mr. Attorney-General made a short reply on the subject of damages.

LORD MANSFIELD.
Gentlemen of the Jury,

There arises upon this evidence a serious question for your consideration.—The nature of the action is such, that the defendant cannot confess a verdict, because this is between the Husband and Wife and the Adulterer; and further proceedings may be had; therefore, the verdict, you give must be out of the truth and justice of the case, and the justice of the evidence.

Now, the single question is, Whether Sir Richard has not been privy to the prostitution of his wife? assenting to, and encouraging and exciting even this defendant? And, if he is so, upon your opinion of the evidence, he ought not to recover in this action—if he is not, why then the only question that remains, is upon the subject of damages; upon which I will not say a word to you. You are the best judges of that.

This woman, for three or four years, has been prostituted with a variety of people; that is extremely clear. A stronger instance than the Doctor's appearance this day, and what he has said, need not have been brought. —In the year 1779, Lord Deerhurst knew Lady Worsley; she was very profligate, and no step was taken by Sir Richard to prevent her: he continued in the isle of Wight ten days, and he has mentioned a conversation that passed between them and Sir Richard, which ought to be laid out of the case, because it seems to be ironical: "That many young men had tried her, without success; and that he might take his chance with her." But he says, once the plaintiff found him in Lady Worsley's dressing-room at four o'clock in the morning; and he only says to him, "Deerhurst, how came you here?" And there is no further explanation or examination between them. Is it not extraordinary to find a Gentleman in his Lady's dressing room at four o'clock in the morning; and nothing further said? All is well; they are all good company the next morning; and some few days afterwards, Lady Worsley is going to Southampton. At the same time Sir Richard goes eight miles with her, and leaves Lord Deerhurst to go on with her to Southampton: he goes on with her to Southampton; he stays there twenty-four hours, and she stays three or four days:—yet there is no appearance of jealousy in the Husband! This evidence deserves your consideration.

Another piece of evidence is, that of the woman at the bath at Maidstone; she swears, she believes it was impossible for Mr. Bisset to have got up the height of the balcony, to look into the bath, unless he had stood upon Sir Richard's shoulders: but this is matter of belief; and they have called the Attorney, and you have heard his evidence: he went down there to take the affidavits: he says he got up with a great deal of ease, and without assistance; that he got up first on an arm-chair which stood on the outside of the bath; and then it was only four feet above him; so that, if he had not stood upon Sir Richard's shoulders, he might easily have pulled him down if he pleased; instead of which, he only taps at the door, and says Seymore! Seymore! Bissett is looking at you. And when she is dressed and comes out, she joins them, and they are all jolly and merry, and laughing, and so away together.

This is the evidence which they have given; and if upon that evidence you think the Husband was privy to consenting, and encouraging this debauchery, he ought not to have your verdict; but if you think he is entitled to your verdict, then the only point for your consideration is, What damages you will give—You will consider of your verdict, and give what damages you think proper.

The Jury went out of court, and after debating near an hour, returned with a verdict for the plaintiff, giving him only One Shilling damages.

The whole of the evidence for the defendant, is not less curious than the testimony brought forwards in favour of the plaintiff: the remark made by the Lady, who had so frequently advised Sir Richard on the conduct of his Wife, must have been peculiarly grateful to a man of his refined and delicate sentiments; when his amiable good nature prevented him from repressing those irregularities of Lady Worsley's conduct, which their mutual friends apprehended, might terminate so disagreeably, the kind compliment of his being the most contented—Husband the Lady ever knew, must have been particularly consoling: and the word Husband so kindly substituted for that of Cuckold! but how was this poor Gentleman deluded through the whole of the business? relying on that virtue, he had intuitively discovered in the bosom of Captain Bissett, he with the most unaffected simplicity, and superiority to mean suspicion, assisted that Gentleman in taking a survey of Lady Worsley's charms, when uncovered in the bath. And yet perhaps, this was the first temptation which shook his friend's virtue, though none of the parties betrayed any symptoms of apprehension, that any thing wrong had happened, but retired laughing, joking; completely merry, happy, and wise.

Sir Richard's conduct, with respect to Lord Deerhurst, was not less expressive of confidence in his wife: and here the observation must strike us, of that general want of acquaintance with Sir Richard, which most of the young men of fashion who appeared on the Trial professed: though so friendly with his Lady, they knew but little of him; doubtless, the elevation of Sir Richard's integrity, and the refined purity of his sentiments, were circumstances but little congenial to the pursuits and attachments of those characters; their particular reserve, however, as to betraying any circumstances which might have affected the Lady's honour, may be urged as an exception in favour of their nicety: what could be a greater instance of Sir Richard's purity, than his obliging permission to Lord Deerhurst, to assail the virtue of Lady Worsley; or the good natured manner in which he passed over the extraordinary circumstance of his being so near her bed-chamber, at four o'clock in the morning! This could have arose from nothing but the conscious virtue of Sir Richard's own immaculate bosom: and how must we commiserate, that so amiable a man should suffer by fraud and deception!

To have seen things in the light Sir Richard did, he doubtless must have possessed a different kind of vision from that of persons in general: perhaps a somewhat resembled the 'poetical second sight' of Puff in the Critic, when the distracted heroine of the Poet's Tragedy, is raving, in all the agonies of despair, for the loss of her lover, the inspiration of the Muses pourtrays the Spanish Fleet in the liveliest colours to her disturbed mind; but her father, who, to use the language of Puff's friend, 'makes an allowance for this poetical second sight,' declares, that the 'Spanish fleet she cannot see, because 'tis not in sight.' The character of this father is represented by the Author, as that of a 'plain matter of fact man;' exactly this 'plain matter of fact man,' was Lord Mansfield: casting wide the poetic fiction, a fancied second sight, or whatever mode of refined illusion Sir Richard might be impelled by; he appealed only to well attested and corroborated circumstances; and directing the Jury by irresistible argument, left to the Baronet the sad recompence afforded him by the verdict.

What the feelings of Sir Richard were, when he heard the determination, it would not be very easy to imagine: the contemptuous pity of his friends, the indignation of the Public, and the sentiments of his own mind, must have afforded a happy combination: the impartial Public did not hesitate in giving their judgment, and all posterity who may hear of the curious discussion, will find no difficulty in delivering an adequate decision.